1783 The European explorers who followed Christopher Columbus to North America in the sixteenth century had no notion of founding a new nation.
Neither did the first European settlers who peopled the thirteen English colonies on the eastern shores of the continent in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
These original colonists may have fled poverty or religious persecution in the Old World, but they continued to view themselves as Europeans, and as subjects of the English king.
They regarded America as but the western rim of a transatlantic European world.
Yet life in the New World made the colonists different from their European cousins, and eventually, during the American Revolution, the Americans came to embrace a vision of their country as an independent nation.
How did this epochal transformation come about?
How did the colonists overcome the conflicts that divided them, unite against Britain, and declare themselves at great cost to be an American people?
They had much in common to begin with.
Most were Englishspeaking.
Most came determined to create an agricultural society modeled on English customs.
Conditions in the New World deepened their common bonds.
Most learned to live lives unfettered by the tyrannies of royal authority, official religion, and social hierarchies that they had left behind.
They grew to cherish ideals that became synonymous with American lifereverence for individual liberty, self-government, religious tolerance, and economic opportunity.
They also commonly displayed a willingness to subjugate outsidersfirst Indians, who were nearly annihilated through war and disease, and then Africans, who were brought in chains to serve as slave labor, especially on the tobacco, rice, and indigo plantations of the southern colonies.
But if the settlement experience gave people a common stock of values, both good and bad, it also divided them.
The thirteen colonies were quite different from one another.
Puritans carved tight, pious, and relatively democratic communities of small family farms out of rocky-soiled New England.
Theirs was a homogeneous world in comparison to most of the southern colonies, where large landholders, mostly Anglicans, built plantations along the coast from which they lorded over a labor force of black slaves and looked down upon the poor white farmers who settled the backcountry.
Different still were the middle colonies stretching from New York to Delaware.
There diversity reigned.
Wellto-do merchants put their stamp on New York City, as Quakers did on Philadelphia, while out in the countryside sprawling estates were interspersed with modest homesteads.
Within individual colonies, conflicts festered over economic interests, ethnic rivalries, and religious practices.
All those clashes made it difficult for colonists to imagine that they were a single people with a common destiny, much less that they ought to break free from Britain.
The American colonists in fact had little reason to complain about Britain.
Each of the thirteen colonies enjoyed a good deal of selfrule.
Many colonists profited from trade within the British Empire.
But by the 1760s, this stable arrangement began to crumble, a victim of the imperial rivalry between France and Britain.
Their struggle for supremacy in North America began in the late seventeenth century and finally dragged in the colonists during the French and Indian War from 1756 to 1763.
That war in one sense strengthened ties with Britain, since colonial militias fought triumphantly alongside the British army against their mutual French and Indian enemies.
But by driving the French from the North American continent, the British made themselves less indispensable to the American colonies.
More important still, after 1763 a financially overstretched British government made the fateful choice of imposing taxes on colonies that had been accustomed to answering mainly to their own colonial assemblies.
By the 1770s issues of taxation, self-rule, and trade restrictions brought the crisis of imperial authority to a head.
Although as late as 1775 most people in the colonies clung to the hope of some kind of accommodation short of outright independence, royal intransigence soon thrust the colonists into a war of independence that neither antagonist could have anticipated just a few years before.
Eight years of revolutionary war did more than anything in the colonial past to bring Americans together as a nation.
Comradeship in arms and the struggle to shape a national government forced Americans to subdue their differences as best they could.
But the spirit of national unity was hardly universal.
One in five colonists sided with the British as Loyalists, and a generation would pass before the wounds of this first American civil war fully healed.
Yet in the end, Americans won the Revolution, with no small measure of help from the French, because in every colony people shared a firm belief that they were fighting for the unalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, in the words of Thomas Jeffersons magnificent Declaration of Independence.
Almost two hundred years of living a new life had prepared Americans to found a new nation.
New World Beginnings  33,000  B .
1769 C HRISTOPHER C OLUMBUS , 1498 S everal billion years ago, that whirling speck of dust known as the earth, fifth in size among the planets, came into being.
About six thousand years agoonly a minute ago in geological timerecorded history of the Western world began.
Certain peoples of the Middle East, developing a primitive culture, gradually emerged from the haze of the past.
Five hundred years agoonly a few seconds in the past, figuratively speakingEuropean explorers stumbled on the American continents.
This dramatic accident forever altered the future of both  RECORDED HISTORY BEGINS JESUS BORN VIRGINIA FOUNDED BICENTENNIAL 4000 B.C.
48 B.C.
1607 1976 COLUMBUS'S DISCOVERY VIRGINIA FOUNDED INDEPENDENCE DECLARED WORLD WAR I I ENDS 46 years 9 years COLD WAR ENDS NEW MILLENNIUM BEGINS 1492 1607 1776 1991 2000 1945 115 years 169 years 169 years the Old World and the New, and of Africa and Asia  as well.
Planet earth took on its present form slowly.
Some 225 million years ago, a single supercontinent contained all the worlds dry land.
Then enormous chunks of terrain began to drift away from this colossal continent, opening the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, narrowing the Pacific Ocean, and forming the great landmasses of Eurasia, Africa, Australia, Antarctica, and the Americas.
The existence of a single original continent has been proved in part by the discovery of nearly identical species of fish that swim today in the long-separated freshwater lakes of the various continents.
Continued shifting and folding of the earths crust thrust up mountain ranges.
The Appalachians were probably formed even before continental separation, perhaps 350 million years ago.
The majestic ranges of western North Americathe Rockies, the Sierra Nevada, the Cascades, and the Coast Ranges arose much more recently, geologically speaking, some 135 million to 25 million years ago.
They are truly American mountains, born after the continent took on its own separate geological identity.
By about 10 million years ago, nature had sculpted the basic geological shape of North America.
The continent was anchored in its northeastern corner by the massive Canadian Shielda zone undergirded by ancient rock, probably the first part of what became the North American landmass to have emerged above sea level.
A narrow eastern coastal plain, or tidewater region, creased by many river valleys, sloped gently upward to the timeworn ridges of the Appalachians.
Those ancient mountains slanted away on their western side into the huge midcontinental basin that rolled downward to the Mississippi Valley bottom and then rose relentlessly to the towering peaks of the Rockies.
From the Rocky Mountain crestthe roof of Americathe land fell off jaggedly into the intermountain Great Basin, bounded by the Rockies on the east and the Sierra and Cascade ranges on the west.
The valleys of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and the WillamettePuget Sound trough seamed the interiors of present-day California, Oregon, and Washington.
The land at last met the foaming Pacific, where the Coast Ranges rose steeply from the sea.
Nature laid a chill hand over much of this terrain in the Great Ice Age, beginning about 2 million years ago.
Two-mile-thick ice sheets crept from the polar regions to blanket parts of Europe, Asia, and the Americas.
In North America the great glaciers carpeted most of present-day Canada and the United States as far southward as a line stretching from Pennsylvania through the Ohio country and the Dakotas to the Pacific Northwest.
When the glaciers finally retreated about 10,000 years ago, they left the North American landscape transformed, and much as we know it today.
The weight of the gargantuan ice mantle had depressed the level of the Canadian Shield.
The grinding and flushing action of the moving and melting ice had scoured away the shields topsoil, pitting its rocky surface with thousands of shallow depressions into which the melting glaciers flowed to form lakes.
The same glacial action scooped out and filled the Great Lakes.
They originally drained southward through the Mississippi River system to the Gulf of Mexico.
When the melting ice unblocked the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, the lake water sought the St.
Lawrence River outlet to the Atlantic Ocean, lowering the Great Lakes level and leaving the MissouriMississippi-Ohio system to drain the enormous midcontinental basin between the Appalachians and the Rockies.
Similarly, in the west, water from the melting glaciers filled sprawling Lake Bonneville, covering much of present-day Utah, Nevada, and Idaho.
It drained to the Pacific Ocean through the Snake and Columbia River systems until diminishing rainfall from the ebbing ice cap lowered the water level, cutting off access to the Snake River outlet.
Deprived of both inflow and drainage, the giant lake became a gradually shrinking inland sea.
It grew increasingly saline, slowly evaporated, and left an arid, mineral-rich desert.
Only Great Salt Lake remained as a relic of Bonnevilles former vastness.
Today Lake Bonnevilles ancient beaches are visible on mountainsides up to 1,000 feet above the dry floor of the Great Basin.
The Great Ice Age shaped more than the geological history of North America.
It also contributed to the origins of the continents human history.
Though recent (and still highly controversial) evidence  suggests that some early peoples may have reached the Americas in crude boats, most probably came by land.
Some 35,000 years ago, the Ice Age congealed much of the world oceans into massive icepack glaciers, lowering the level of the sea.
As the sea level dropped, it exposed a land bridge connecting Eurasia with North America in the area of the present-day Bering Sea between Siberia and Alaska.
Across that bridge, probably following migratory herds of game, ventured small bands of nomadic Asian huntersthe immigrant ancestors of the Native Americans.
They continued to trek across the Bering isthmus for some 250 centuries, slowly peopling the American continents.
As the Ice Age ended and the glaciers melted, the sea level rose again, inundating the land bridge about 10,000 years ago.
Nature thus barred the door to further immigration for many thousands of years, leaving this part of the human family marooned for millennia on the now-isolated American continents.
Time did not stand still for these original Americans.
The same climatic warming that melted the ice and drowned the bridge to Eurasia gradually opened ice-free valleys through which vanguard bands groped their way southward and eastward across the Americas.
Roaming slowly through this awesome wilderness, they eventually reached the far tip of South America, some 15,000 miles from Siberia.
By the time Europeans arrived in America in 1492, perhaps 54 million people inhabited the two American continents.
* Over the centuries they split into countless tribes, evolved more than 2,000 separate languages, and developed many diverse religions, cultures, and ways of life.
Incas in Peru, Mayans in Central America, and Aztecs in Mexico shaped stunningly sophisticated civilizations.
Their advanced agricultural practices, C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 *Much controversy surrounds estimates of the pre-Columbian Native American population.
According to the most plausible theory of how the Americas were populated, for some 25,000 years, people crossed the Bering land bridge from Eurasia to North America.
Gradually they dispersed southward down ice-free valleys, populating both the American continents.
This map from 1540 represents one of the earliest efforts to make geographic sense out of the  suggests just how staggering a blow to the European imagination was the discovery of the Americas.
Europeans reached instinctively for the most expansive of all possible terms ply   Columbuss startling report that lands and peoples previously unimagined lay beyond the horizon of Europes western sea.
Gradually, the immense implications of the New Worlds existence began to impress themselves on Europe, with consequences for literature, art, politics, the economyand of course for cartography.
Maps can only be  and are therefore necessarily distortions.
This map bears a recognizable resemblance to modern map makers renderings of the American continents, but it also contains gross geographical inaccuracies (note the location of Japan the North American west coast) as well as telling commentaries on what sixteenth-century Europeans found remarkable (note the  respectively).
What further clues to the European mentality of the time does the map offer?
In what ways might misconceptions about the geography of the Americas have influenced further exploration and settlement patterns?
based primarily on the cultivation of maize, which is Indian corn, fed large populations, perhaps as many as 20 million in Mexico alone.
Although without large draft animals such as horses and oxen, and lacking even the simple technology of the wheel, these peoples built elaborate cities and carried on far-flung commerce.
Talented mathematicians, they made strikingly accurate astronomical observations.
The Aztecs also routinely sought the favor of their gods by offering human sacrifices, cutting the hearts out of the chests of living victims, who were often captives conquered in battle.
By some accounts more than 5,000 people were ritually slaughtered to celebrate the crowning of one Aztec chieftain.
Agriculture, especially corn growing, accounted for the size and sophistication of the Native American civilizations in Mexico and South America.
About 5000  B .
hunter-gatherers in highland Mexico developed a wild grass into the staple crop of corn, which became their staff of life and the foundation of the complex, large-scale, centralized Aztec and Incan nation-states that eventually emerged.
Cultivation of corn spread across the Americas from the Mexican heartland.
Everywhere it was planted, corn began to transform nomadic hunting bands into settled agricultural villagers, but this process went forward slowly and unevenly.
Corn planting reached the present-day American Southwest by about 1200  B .
and powerfully molded Pueblo culture.
The Pueblo peoples in the Rio Grande valley constructed intricate irrigation systems to water their cornfields.
They were dwelling in villages of multistoried, terraced buildings when Spanish explorers made contact with them in the sixteenth century.
( lage in Spanish.
) Corn cultivation reached other parts of North America considerably later.
The timing of its arrival in different localities explains much about the  relative rates of development of different Native American peoples.
Throughout the continent to the north and east of the land of the Pueblos, social life was less elaborately developedindeed societies in the modern sense of the word scarcely existed.
No dense concentrations of population or complex nation-states comparable to the Aztec empire existed in North America outside of Mexico at the time of the Europeans arrivalone of the reasons for the relative ease with which the European colonizers subdued the native North Americans.
The Mound Builders of the Ohio River valley, the Mississippian culture of the lower Midwest, and the desert-dwelling Anasazi peoples of the Southwest did sustain some large settlements after the incorporation of corn planting into their way of  life during the first millennium  A .
The Mississippian settlement at Cahokia, near present-day East St.
Louis, was at one time home to as many as twenty-five thousand people.
The Anasazis built an elaborate pueblo of more than six hundred interconnected rooms at Chaco Canyon in modern-day New Mexico.
But mysteriously, perhaps due to prolonged drought, all those ancient cultures had fallen into decline by about  A .
1300.
The cultivation of maize, as well as of highyielding strains of beans and squash, reached the southeastern Atlantic seaboard region of North America about  A .
1000.
These plants made possible three-sister farming, with beans growing on the trellis of the cornstalks and squash covering the planting mounds to retain moisture in the soil.
The rich diet provided by this environmentally clever farming technique produced some of the highest population densities on the continent, among them the Creek, Choctaw, and Cherokee peoples.
The Iroquois in the northeastern woodlands, inspired by a legendary leader named Hiawatha, in the sixteenth century created perhaps the closest North American approximation to the great nationstates of Mexico and Peru.
The Iroquois Confederacy developed the political and organizational skills to sustain a robust military alliance that menaced its neighbors, Native American and European alike, for well over a century (see Makers of America: The Iroquois, pp.
4041).
But for the most part, the native peoples of North America were living in small, scattered, and impermanent settlements on the eve of the Europeans arrival.
In more settled agricultural groups, women tended the crops while men hunted, fished, gathered fuel, and cleared fields for planting.
This pattern of life frequently conferred substantial authority on women, and many North American native peoples, including the Iroquois, developed matrilinear cultures, in which power and possessions passed down the female side of the family line.
Unlike the Europeans, who would soon arrive with the presumption that humans had dominion over the earth and with the technologies to alter the C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 North American Indian Peoples at the Time of First Contact with Europeans Because this map depicts the location of various Indian peoples  and because initial contacts ranged from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries, it is necessarily subject to considerable chronological skewing, and is only a crude approximation of the original territory of any given group.
The map also cannot capture the fluidity and dynamism of Native American life even before Columbuss discovery.
For example, the Navajo and Apache peoples had migrated from present-day northern Canada only shortly before the Spanish first encountered them in the present-day American Southwest in the 1500s.
The map also places the Sioux on the Great Plains, where Europeans met up with them in the early nineteenth centurybut the Sioux had spilled onto the Plains not long before then from the forests surrounding the Great Lakes.
The indigenous populations of the southeastern and mid-Atlantic regions are especially difficult to represent accurately in a map like this because pre-Columbian intertribal conflicts had so scrambled the native inhabitants that it is virtually impossible to determine which groups were originally where.
very face of the land, the Native Americans had neither the desire nor the means to manipulate nature aggressively.
They revered the physical world and endowed nature with spiritual properties.
Yet they did sometimes ignite massive forest fires, deliberately torching thousands of acres of trees to create better hunting habitats, especially for deer.
This practice accounted for the open, parklike appearance of the eastern woodlands that so amazed early European explorers.
But in a broad sense, the land did not feel the hand of the Native Americans heavy upon it, partly because they were so few in number.
They were so thinly spread across the continent that vast areas were virtually untouched by a human presence.
In the fateful year 1492, probably no more than 4 million Native Americans padded through the whispering, primeval forests and paddled across the sparkling, virgin waters of North America.
They were blissfully unaware that the historic isolation of the Americas was about to end forever, as the land and the native peoples alike felt the full shock of the European discovery.
Europeans, for their part, were equally unaware of the existence of the Americas.
Blond-bearded Norse seafarers from Scandinavia had chanced upon the northeastern shoulder of North America about  A .
1000.
They landed at a place near LAnse aux Meadows in present-day Newfoundland that abounded in wild grapes, which led them to name the spot Vinland.
But no strong nation-state, yearning to expand, supported these venturesome voyagers.
Their flimsy settlements consequently were soon abandoned, and their discovery was forgotten, except in Scandinavian saga and song.
For several centuries thereafter, other restless Europeans, with the growing power of ambitious governments behind them, sought contact with a wider world, whether for conquest or trade.
They thus set in motion the chain of events that led to a drive toward Asia, the penetration of Africa, and the completely accidental discovery of the New World.
Christian crusaders must rank high among Americas indirect discoverers.
Clad in shining armor, tens of thousands of these European warriors tried from the eleventh to the fourteenth century to wrest the Holy Land from Muslim control.
Foiled in their military assaults, the crusaders nevertheless acquired a taste for the exotic delights of Asia.
Goods that had been virtually unknown in Europe now were cravedsilk for clothing, drugs for aching flesh, perfumes for unbathed bodies, colorful draperies for gloomy castles, and spices especially sugar, a rare luxury in Europe before the crusadesfor preserving and flavoring food.
Europes developing sweet tooth would have momentous implications for world history.
C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 The luxuries of the East were prohibitively expensive in Europe.
They had to be transported enormous distances from the Spice Islands (Indonesia), China, and India, in creaking ships and on swaying camelback.
The journey led across the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea or along the tortuous caravan routes of Asia or the Arabian peninsula, ending at the ports of the eastern Mediterranean.
Muslim middlemen exacted a heavy toll en route.
By the time the strange-smelling goods reached Italian merchants at Venice and Genoa, they were so costly that purchasers and profits alike were narrowly limited.
European consumers and distributors were naturally eager to find a less expensive route to the riches of Asia or to develop alternate sources of supply.
European appetites were further whetted when footloose Marco Polo, an Italian adventurer, returned to Europe in 1295 and began telling tales of his nearly twenty-year sojourn in China.
Though he may in fact never have seen China (legend to the contrary, the hard evidence is sketchy), he must be regarded as an indirect discoverer of the New World, for his book, with its descriptions of rose-tinted pearls and golden pagodas, stimulated European desires for a cheaper route to the treasures of the East.
These accumulating pressures brought a breakthrough for European expansion in the fifteenth century.
Before the middle of that century, European sailors refused to sail southward along the coast of West Africa because they could not beat their way home against the prevailing northerly winds and south-flowing currents.
About 1450, Portuguese mariners overcame those obstacles.
Not only had they developed the caravel, a ship that could sail more closely into the wind, but they had discovered that they could return to Europe by sailing northwesterly from the African coast toward the Azores, where the prevailing westward breezes would carry them home.
The new world of sub-Saharan Africa now came within the grasp of questing Europeans.
The northern shore of Africa, as part of the Mediterranean world, had been known to Europe since antiquity.
But because sea travel down the African coast had been virtually impossible, Africa south of the forbidding Sahara Desert barrier had remained remote and mysterious.
African gold, perhaps two-thirds of Europes supply, crossed the Sahara on camelback, and shadowy tales may have reached Europe about the flourishing West African kingdom of Mali in the Niger River valley, with its impressive Islamic university at Timbuktu.
But Europeans had no direct access to sub-Saharan Africa until the Portuguese navigators began to creep down the West African coast in the middle of the fifteenth century.
The Portuguese promptly set up trading posts along the African shore for the purchase of gold and slaves.
Arab flesh merchants and Africans themselves had traded slaves for centuries before the Europeans arrived.
They routinely charged higher prices for slaves from distant sources, who could not easily flee to their native villages nor be easily rescued by their kin.
Slave brokers also deliberately separated persons from the same tribes and mixed unlike people together to frustrate organized resistance.
Thus from its earliest days, even before Europeans arrived in Africa, slavery by its very nature fostered the extinction of regional African cultures and tribal identities.
The Portuguese adopted these Arab and African practices.
They built up their own systematic traffic in slaves to work the sugar plantations that Portugal, and later Spain, established on the African coastal islands of Madeira, the Canaries, So Tom, and Principe.
The Portuguese appetite for slaves was enormous and dwarfed the modest scale of the preEuropean traffic.
Slave trading became a big business.
Some forty thousand Africans were carried away to the Atlantic sugar islands in the last half of the fifteenth century.
Millions more were to be wrenched from their home continent after the discovery of the Americas.
In these fifteenth-century Portuguese adventures in Africa were to be found the origins of the modern plantation system, based on large-scale commercial agriculture and the wholesale exploitation of slave labor.
This kind of plantation economy would shape the destiny of much of the New World.
C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 The World Known to Europe, 1492  The seafaring Portuguese pushed still farther southward in search of the water route to Asia.
Edging cautiously down the African coast, Bartholomeu Das rounded the southernmost tip of the Dark Continent in 1488.
Ten years later Vasco da Gama finally reached India (hence the name Indies, given by Europeans to all the mysterious lands of the Orient), and returned home with a small but tantalizing cargo of jewels and spices.
Meanwhile, the kingdom of Spain became unitedan event pregnant with destinyin the late fifteenth century.
This new unity resulted primarily from the marriage of two sovereigns, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile, and from the brutal expulsion of the infidel Muslim Moors from Spain after centuries of Christian-Islamic warfare.
Glorying in their sudden strength, the Spaniards were eager to outstrip their Portuguese rivals in the race to tap the wealth of the Indies.
To the south and east, Portugal controlled the African coast and thus controlled the gateway to the round-Africa water route to India.
Of necessity, therefore, Spain looked westward.
The stage was now set for a cataclysmic shift in the course of historythe history not only of Europe but of all the world.
Europeans clamored for more and cheaper products from the lands beyond the Mediterranean.
Africa had been established as a source of cheap slave labor for plantation agriculture.
The Portuguese voyages had demonstrated the feasibility of long-range ocean navigation.
In Spain a modern national state was taking shape, with the unity, wealth, and power to shoulder the formidable tasks of discovery, conquest, and colonization.
The dawn of the Renaissance in the fourteenth century nurtured an ambitious spirit of optimism and 1498 1488 Genoa Venice Constantinople Delhi Peking Alexandria Timbuktu Northern route Middle route Southern route Daz (Portuguese), 1488 da Gama (Portuguese), 1498  Prevailing winds SPICE ISLANDS AFRICA CHINA INDIA PERSIA SPAIN PORTUGAL EAST INDIES MALI MADEIRA CANARY  ISLANDS SAO TOME PRINCIPE   MADAGASCAR P P P P P P P P P Trade Routes with the East Goods on the early routes passed through so many hands along the way that their ultimate source remained mysterious to Europeans.
adventure.
Printing presses, introduced about 1450, facilitated the spread of scientific knowledge.
The mariners compass, possibly borrowed from the Arabs, eliminated some of the uncertainties of sea travel.
Meanwhile, across the ocean, the unsuspecting New World innocently awaited its European  discoverers.
Onto this stage stepped Christopher Columbus.
This skilled Italian seafarer persuaded the Spanish monarchs to outfit him with three tiny but seaworthy ships, manned by a motley crew.
Daringly, he unfurled the sails of his cockleshell craft and headed westward.
His superstitious sailors, fearful of venturing into the oceanic unknown, grew increasingly mutinous.
After six weeks at sea, failure loomed when, on October 12, 1492, the crew sighted an island in the Bahamas.
A new world thus swam within the vision of Europeans.
Columbuss sensational achievement obscures the fact that he was one of the most successful failures in history.
Seeking a new water route to the fabled Indies, he in fact had bumped into an enormous land barrier blocking the ocean pathway.
For decades thereafter explorers strove to get through it or around it.
The truth gradually dawned that sprawling new continents had been discovered.
Yet Columbus was at first so certain that he had skirted the rim of the Indies that he called the native peoples Indians, a gross geographical misnomer that somehow stuck.
Columbuss discovery would eventually convulse four continentsEurope, Africa, and the two Americas.
Thanks to his epochal voyage, an interdependent global economic system emerged on a scale undreamed-of before he set sail.
Its workings touched every shore washed by the Atlantic Ocean.
Europe provided the markets, the capital, and the technology; Africa furnished the labor; and the New World offered its raw materials, especially its precious metals and its soil for the cultivation of sugar cane.
For Europeans as well as for Africans and Native Americans, the world after 1492 would never be the same, for better or worse.
Two ecosystemsthe fragile, naturally evolved networks of relations among organisms in a stable environmentcommingled and clashed when Columbus waded ashore.
The reverberations from that historic encounter echoed for centuries after 1492.
The flora and fauna of the Old and New Worlds had been separated for thousands of years.
European explorers marveled at the strange sights that greeted them, including exotic beasts such as iguanas and snakes with castanets (rattlesnakes).
Native New World plants such as tobacco, maize, beans, tomatoes, and especially the lowly potato eventually revolutionized the international economy as well as the European diet, feeding the rapid population growth of the Old World.
These foodstuffs were among the most important Indian gifts to the Europeans and to the rest of the world.
Perhaps three-fifths of the crops cultivated around the globe today originated in the Americas.
Ironically, the introduction into Africa of New World foodstuffs like maize, manioc, and sweet potatoes may have fed an African population boom that numerically, though not morally, more than offset the losses inflicted by the slave trade.
In exchange the Europeans introduced Old World crops and animals to the Americas.
Columbus returned to the Caribbean island of Hispaniola C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 (present-day Haiti and the Dominican Republic) in 1493 with seventeen ships that unloaded twelve hundred men and a virtual Noahs Ark of cattle, swine, and horses.
The horses soon reached the North American mainland through Mexico and in less than two centuries had spread as far as Canada.
North American Indian tribes like the Apaches, Sioux, and Blackfoot swiftly adopted the horse, transforming their cultures into highly mobile, wide-ranging hunter societies that roamed the grassy Great Plains in pursuit of the shaggy buffalo.
Columbus also brought seedlings of sugar cane, which thrived in the warm Caribbean climate.
A sugar revolution consequently took place in the European diet, fueled by the forced migration of millions of Africans to work the canefields and sugar mills of the New World.
Unwittingly, the Europeans also brought other organisms in the dirt on their boots and the dust on their clothes, such as the seeds of Kentucky bluegrass, dandelions, and daisies.
Most ominous of all, in their bodies they carried the germs that caused smallpox, yellow fever, and malaria.
Indeed Old World diseases would quickly devastate the Native Americans.
During the Indians millennia of isolation in the Americas, most of the Old Worlds killer maladies had disappeared from among them.
But generations of freedom from those illnesses had also wiped out protective antibodies.
Devoid of natural resistance to Old World sicknesses, Indians died in droves.
Within fifty years of the Spanish arrival, the population of the Taino natives in Hispaniola dwindled from some 1 million people to about 200.
Enslavement and armed aggression took their toll, but the deadliest killers were microbes, not muskets.
The lethal germs spread among the New World peoples with the speed and force of a hurricane, swiftly sweeping far ahead of the human invaders; most of those afflicted never laid eyes on a European.
In the centuries after Columbuss landfall, as many as 90 percent of the Native Americans perished, a demographic catastrophe without parallel in human history.
This depopulation was surely not intended by the Spanish, but it was nevertheless so severe that entire cultures and ancient ways of life were extinguished forever.
Baffled, enraged, and vengeful, The Columbian Exchange Columbuss discovery initiated the kind of explosion in international commerce that a later age would call globalization.
(Source: Adapted from  Third Edition, Combined Edition by Faragher, Buhle, Czitrom, and Armitage.
Copyright  1999.
By permission of Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
) NEW WORLD OLD WORLD Wheat, sugar, rice, coffee Syphilis Corn, potatoes, pineapples, tomatoes, tobacco, beans, vanilla, chocolate Gold, silver Horses, cows, pigs Smallpox, measles, bubonic plague, influenza, typhus, diphtheria, scarlet fever AFRICA Slave labor Indian slaves sometimes kneaded tainted blood into their masters bread, to little effect.
Perhaps it was poetic justice that the Indians unintentionally did take a kind of revenge by infecting the early explorers with syphilis, injecting that lethal sexually transmitted disease for the first time into Europe.
Gradually, Europeans realized that the American continents held rich prizes, especially the gold and silver of the advanced Indian civilizations in Mexico and Peru.
Spain secured its claim to Columbuss discovery in the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494), dividing with Portugal the heathen lands of the New World.
The lions share went to Spain, but Portugal received compensating territory in Africa and Asia, as well as title to lands that one day would be Brazil.
Spain became the dominant exploring and colonizing power in the 1500s.
In the service of God, as well as in search of gold and glory, Spanish  bean and eventually onto the mainland of the American continents (see Makers of America: The Spanish   long roster of notable deeds, two spectacular exploits must be headlined.
Vasco Nuez Balboa, hailed as the discoverer of the Pacific Ocean, waded into the foaming waves off Panama in 1513 and boldly claimed for his king all the lands washed by that sea!
Ferdinand Magellan started from Spain in 1519 with five tiny ships.
After beating through the storm-lashed strait off the tip of South America that still bears his name, he was slain by the inhabitants of the Philippines.
His one remaining vessel creaked home in 1522, completing the first circumnavigation of the globe.
Other ambitious Spaniards ventured into North America.
In 1513 and 1521, Juan Ponce de Len explored Florida, which he at first thought was an C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 The Destruction of the Indies  Who of those in future centuries will believe this?
I myself who am writing this and saw  it and know the most about it can hardly believe that such was possible.
island.
Seeking goldand probably not the mythical fountain of youthhe instead met with death by an Indian arrow.
In 15401542 Francisco Coronado, in quest of fabled golden cities that turned out to be adobe pueblos, wandered with a clanking cavalcade through Arizona and New Mexico, penetrating as far east as Kansas.
En route his expedition discovered two awesome natural wonders: the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River and enormous herds of buffalo (bison).
Hernando de Soto, with six hundred armorplated men, undertook a fantastic gold-seeking expedition during 15391542.
Floundering through marshes and pine barrens from Florida westward, he discovered and crossed the majestic Mississippi River just north of its junction with the Arkansas River.
After brutally mistreating the Indians with iron collars and fierce dogs, he at length died of fever and wounds.
His troops secretly disposed of his remains at night in the Mississippi, lest the Indians exhume and abuse their abusers corpse.
Meanwhile in South America, the ironfisted conqueror Francisco Pizarro crushed the Incas of Peru in 1532 and added a huge hoard of booty to Spanish coffers.
By 1600 Spain was swimming in New World silver, mostly from the fabulously rich mines at Potos in present-day Bolivia, as well as from Mexico.
This flood of precious metal touched off a price revolution in Europe that increased consumer costs by as much as 500 percent in the hundred years after the mid-sixteenth century.
Some scholars see in this ballooning European money supply the fuel that fed the growth of the economic system known as capitalism.
Certainly, New World bullion helped transform the world economy.
It swelled the vaults of bankers from Spain to Italy, laying the foundations of the modern commercial banking system.
It clinked in the purses of merchants in France and Holland, stimulating the spread of commerce and manufacturing.
And it paid for much of the burgeoning international trade with Asia, whose sellers had little use for any European good except silver.
The islands of the Caribbean Seathe West Indies as they came to be called, in yet another perpetuation of Columbuss geographic confusion served as offshore bases for the staging of the Spanish invasion of the mainland Americas.
Here supplies could be stored, and men and horses could be rested and acclimated, before proceeding to the conquest of the continents.
The loosely organized and vulnerable native communities of the West Indies also provided laboratories for testing the techniques that would eventually subdue the advanced Indian civilizations of Mexico and Peru.
The most important such technique was the institution known as the  ernment to commend, or give, Indians to certain colonists in return for the promise to try to Christianize them.
In all but name, it was slavery.
Spanish missionary Bartolom de Las Casas, appalled by the pestilence invented by Satan.
Principal Early Spanish Explorations and Conquests Note that Coronado traversed northern Texas and Oklahoma.
In present-day eastern Kansas, he found, instead of the great golden city he sought, a drab encampment, probably of Wichita Indians.
n 1492, the same year that Columbus sighted America, the great Moorish city of Granada, in Spain, fell after a ten-year siege.
For five centuries the Christian kingdoms of Spain had been trying to drive the North African Muslim Moors (the Dark Ones, in Spanish) off the Iberian peninsula, and with the fall of Granada they succeeded.
But the lengthy Reconquista had left its mark on Spanish society.
Centuries of military and religious confrontation nurtured an obsession with status and honor, bred religious zealotry and intolerance, and created a large class of men who regarded manual labor and commerce contemptuously.
With the Reconquista ended, some of these men turned their restless gaze to Spains New World frontier.
At first Spanish hopes for America focused on the Caribbean and on finding a sea route to Asia.
Gradually, however, word filtered back of rich kingdoms on the mainland.
Between 1519 and 1540, Spanish   in two wide arcs of conquestone driving from Cuba through Mexico into what is now the southwestern United States, the other starting from Panama and pushing south into Peru.
Within half a century of Columbuss arrival in the Americas, the and Incan empires and claimed for church and crown a territory that extended from Colorado to Argentina, including much of what is now the continental United States.
The military conquest of this vast region was achieved by just ten thousand men, organized in a series of private expeditions.
Hernn Corts, Francisco Pizarro, and other aspiring conquerors signed contracts with the Spanish monarch, raised money from investors, and then went about recruiting an army.
Only a small minority of the  leaders or followerswere nobles.
About half were professional soldiers and sailors; the rest comprised peasants, artisans, and members of the middling classes.
Most were in their twenties and early thirties, and all knew how to wield a sword.
Diverse motives spurred these motley adventurers.
Some hoped to win royal titles and favors by bringing new peoples under the Spanish flag.
Others sought to ensure Gods favor by spreading Christianity to the pagans.
Some men hoped to escape dubious pasts, and others sought the kind of historical adventure experienced by heroes of classical antiquity.
Nearly all shared a lust for gold.
As one of Cortss foot soldiers put it, We came here to serve God and the king, and also to get rich.
One historian adds that the  their knees and then fell upon the aborigines.
Armed with horses and gunpowder and preceded by disease, the  powered the Indians.
But most never achieved their dreams of glory.
Few received titles of nobility, and many of the rank and file remained permanently indebted to the absentee investors who paid for their equipment.
Even when an expedition captured exceptionally rich booty, the spoils were unevenly divided: men from the commanders home region often received more, and men on horseback generally got two shares to the infantrymans one.
The gradually tightened its control in the New World.
By the 1530s in Mexico and the 1550s in Peru, colorless colonial administrators had replaced the freebooting  Nevertheless, the  kind of immortality.
Because of a scarcity of Spanish women in the early days of the conquest, many of the  soldiers who conquered Paraguay received three native women each, and Cortss soldiers in Mexicowho were forbidden to consort with pagan womenquickly had their lovers baptized into the Catholic faith.
Their offspring, the new race of between Latin Americas European and Indian races.
In 1519 Hernn Corts set sail from Cuba with sixteen fresh horses and several hundred men aboard eleven ships, bound for Mexico and for destiny.
On the island of Cozumel off the Yucatan peninsula, he rescued a Spanish castaway who had been enslaved for several years by the Mayan-speaking Indians.
A short distance farther on, he picked up the female Indian slave Malinche, who knew both Mayan and Nahuatl, the language of the powerful Aztec rulers of the great empire in the highlands of central Mexico.
In addition to his superior firepower, Corts now had the advantage, through these two interpreters, of understanding the speech of the native peoples whom he was about to encounter, including the Aztecs.
Malinche eventually learned Spanish and was baptized with the Spanish name of Doa Marina.
Near present-day Vera Cruz, Corts made his final landfall.
Through his interpreters he learned of unrest within the Aztec empire among the peoples from whom the Aztecs demanded tribute.
He also heard alluring tales of the gold and other wealth stored up in the legendary Aztec capital of Tenochtitln.
He lusted to tear open the coffers of the Aztec kingdom.
To quell his mutinous troops, he boldly burned his ships, cutting off any hope of retreat.
Gathering a force of some twenty thousand Indian allies, he marched on Tenochtitln and toward one of historys most dramatic and fateful encounters.
As Corts proceeded, the Aztec chieftain Moctezuma sent ambassadors bearing fabulous gifts to welcome the approaching Spaniards.
These only whetted the  ish suffer from a strange disease of the heart, Corts allegedly informed the emissaries, for which the only known remedy is gold.
The ambassadors reported this comment to Moctezuma, along with the astonishing fact that the newcomers rode on  the backs of deer (horses).
The superstitious Moctezuma also believed that Corts was the god Quetzalcoatl, whose return from the eastern sea was predicted in Aztec legends.
Expectant yet apprehensive, Moctezuma allowed the  approach his capital unopposed.
As the Spaniards entered the Valley of Mexico, the sight of the Aztec capital of Tenochtitln amazed them.
With 300,000 inhabitants spread over ten square miles, it rivaled in size and pomp any city in contemporary Europe.
The Aztec metropolis rose from an island in the center of a lake, surrounded by floating gardens of extraordinary beauty.
It was conC HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 nected to the mainland by a series of causeways and supplied with fresh water by an artfully designed aqueduct.
Moctezuma treated Corts hospitably at first, but soon the Spaniards hunger for gold and power exhausted their welcome.
They thirsted mightily for gold; they stuffed themselves with it; they starved for it; they lusted for it like pigs, said one Aztec.
On the  1520, the Aztecs attacked, driving the Spanish down the causeways from Tenochtitln in a frantic, bloody retreat.
Corts then laid siege to the city, and it capitulated on August 13, 1521.
That same year a smallpox epidemic burned through the Valley of Mexico.
The combination of conquest and disease took a grisly toll.
The Aztec empire gave way to three centuries of Spanish rule.
The temples of Tenochtitln were destroyed to make way for the Christian cathedrals of Mexico City, built on the site of the ruined Indian capital.
And the native population of Mexico, winnowed mercilessly by the invaders diseases, shrank from some 20 million to 2 million people in less than a century.
Yet the invader brought more than conquest and death.
He brought his crops and his animals, his language and his laws, his customs and his religion, all of which proved adaptable to the peoples of Mexico.
He intermarried with the surviving Indians, creating a distinctive culture of  mixed Indian and European heritage.
To this day Mexican civilization remains a unique blend of the Old World and the New, producing both ambivalence and pride among people of Mexican heritage.
Cortss translator Malinche, for example, has given her name to the Mexican language in the word  Columbus Day as the  of a wholly new race of people.
Spains colonial empire grew swiftly and impressively.
Within about half a century of Columbuss landfall, hundreds of Spanish cities and towns flourished in the Americas, especially in the great silverproducing centers of Peru and Mexico.
Some 160,000 Spaniards, mostly men, had subjugated millions of Indians.
Majestic cathedrals dotted the land, printing presses turned out books, and scholars studied at distinguished universities including those at Mexico City and Lima, Peru, both founded in 1551, eighty-five years before Harvard, the first college established in the English colonies.
But how secure were these imperial possessions?
Other powers were already sniffing around the edges of the Spanish domain, eager to bite off their share of the promised wealth of the new lands.
The upstart English sent Giovanni Caboto (known in English as John Cabot) to explore the northeastern coast of North America in 1497 and 1498.
The French king dispatched another Italian mariner, Giovanni da Verrazano, to probe the eastern seaboard in 1524.
Ten years later the Frenchman Jacques Cartier journeyed hundreds of miles up the St.
Lawrence River.
To secure the northern periphery of their New World domain against such encroachments and to convert more Indian souls to Christianity, the Spanish began to fortify and settle their North American borderlands.
In a move to block French ambitions and to protect the sea-lanes to the Caribbean, the Spanish erected a fortress at St.
Augustine, Florida, in 1565, thus founding the oldest continually inhabited European settlement in the future United States.
In Mexico the tales of Coronados expedition of the 1540s to the upper Rio Grande and Colorado River regions continued to beckon the  tionary column, with eighty-three rumbling wagons and hundreds of grumbling men, traversed the bare Sonora Desert from Mexico into the Rio Grande  valley in 1598.
Led by Don Juan de Oate, the Spaniards cruelly abused the Pueblo peoples they encountered.
In the Battle of Acoma in 1599, the Spanish severed one foot of each survivor.
They proclaimed the area to be the province of New Mexico in 1609 and founded its capital at Santa Fe the following year.
The Spanish settlers in New Mexico found a few furs and precious little gold, but they did discover a wealth of souls to be harvested for the Christian religion.
The Roman Catholic mission became the central institution in colonial New Mexico until the missionaries efforts to suppress native religious customs provoked an Indian uprising called Pops Rebellion in 1680.
The Pueblo rebels destroyed every Catholic church in the province and killed a score of priests and hundreds of Spanish settlers.
In a reversal of Cortss treatment of the Aztec temples more than a century earlier, the Indians rebuilt a of the Spanish plaza at Santa Fe.
It took nearly half a century for the Spanish fully to reclaim New Mexico from the insurrectionary Indians.
Meanwhile, as a further hedge against the everthreatening French, who had sent an expedition under Robert de La Salle down the Mississippi River in the 1680s, the Spanish began around 1716 to establish settlements in Texas.
Some refugees from the Pueblo uprising trickled into Texas, and a few missions were established there, including the one at San Antonio later known as the Alamo.
But for  at least another century, the Spanish presence remained weak in this distant northeastern outpost of Spains Mexican empire.
To the west, in California, no serious foreign threat loomed, and Spain directed its attention there only belatedly.
Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo had explored the California coast in 1542, but he failed to find San Francisco Bay or anything else of much C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 Quivira Durango El Paso Santa Fe Taos Acoma Tucson Mission San Antonio (1718) California missions, 1769-1823 MEXICO Cabrillo, 1542 de Oate, 1598 Presentday New Mexico Spains North American Frontier, 15421823 interest.
For some two centuries thereafter, California slumbered undisturbed by European intruders.
Then in 1769 Spanish missionaries led by Father Junipero Serra founded at San Diego the first of a chain of twenty-one missions that wound up the coast as far as Sonoma, north of San Francisco Bay.
Father Serras brown-robed Franciscan friars toiled with zealous devotion to Christianize the three hundred thousand native Californians.
They gathered the seminomadic Indians into fortified missions and taught them horticulture and basic crafts.
These mission Indians did adopt Christianity, but they also lost contact with their native cultures and often lost their lives as well, as the white mans diseases doomed these biologically vulnerable peoples.
The misdeeds of the Spanish in the New World obscured their substantial achievements and helped give birth to the Black Legend.
This false concept held that the conquerors merely tortured and butchered the Indians (killing for Christ), stole their gold, infected them with smallpox, and left little but misery behind.
The Spanish invaders did indeed kill, enslave, and infect countless natives, but they also erected a colossal empire, sprawling from California and Florida to Tierra del Fuego.
They grafted their culture, laws, religion, and language onto a wide array of native societies, laying the foundations for a score of Spanish-speaking nations.
Clearly, the Spaniards, who had more than a centurys head start over the English, were genuine empire builders and cultural innovators in the New ENGLAND FRANCE SPAIN CUBA HISPANIOLA PORTUGUESE BRAZIL E U R O P E A F R I C A N O R T H A M E R I C A S P A N I S H S O U T H A M E R I C A Columbus, 1492 Cabot, 1497 Cabot, 1498 Magellan, 15191522 Verrazano, 1524 Treaty line of 1494 dividing Spanish and Portuguese lands Occupied by Spanish, 14921743 Occupied by Portuguese 15321743 Principal Voyages of Discovery Spain, Portugal, France, and England reaped the greatest advantages from the New World, but much of the earliest exploration was done by Italians, notably Christopher Columbus of Genoa.
John Cabot, another native of Genoa (his original name was Giovanni Caboto), sailed for Englands King Henry VII.
Giovanni da Verrazano was a Florentine employed by France.
World.
As compared with their Anglo-Saxon rivals, their colonial establishment was larger and richer, and it was destined to endure more than a quarter of a century longer.
And in the last analysis,  the Spanish paid the Native Americans the high compliment of fusing with them through marriage and incorporating indigenous culture into their own, rather than shunning and eventually  isolating the Indians as their English adversaries would do.
C HAPTER 1 New World Beginnings, 33,000  B .
1769 First humans cross into Americas  from Asia Corn is developed as a staple crop in highland Mexico First civilized societies develop in the  Middle East Corn planting reaches present-day American Southwest Norse voyagers discover and briefly settle in northeastern North America Corn cultivation reaches Midwest and southeastern Atlantic seaboard Height of Mississippian settlement at Cahokia Christian crusades arouse European  interest in the East Marco Polo returns to Europe Spain becomes united Daz rounds southern tip of Africa Columbus lands in the Bahamas Treaty of Tordesillas between Spain and Portugal Da Gama reaches India Cabot explores northeastern coast of North America for England Balboa claims all lands touched by the Pacific Ocean for Spain Ponce de Len explores Florida Corts conquers Mexico for Spain Magellans vessel completes  circumnavigation of the world Verrazano explores eastern seaboard of  North America for France Pizarro crushes Incas Cartier journeys up the St.
Lawrence River De Soto explores the Southeast and  discovers the Mississippi River Coronado explores present-day  Southwest Cabrillo explores California coast for Spain Spanish build fortress at St.
Augustine Iroquois Confederacy founded, according to Iroquois legend Spanish under Oate conquer Pueblo  peoples of Rio Grande valley Spanish found New Mexico Pops Rebellion in New Mexico French expedition down Mississippi River  under La Salle Serra founds first California mission,  at San Diego For further reading, see page A1 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Planting  of English America  15001733 S IR W ALTER R ALEIGH , 1602 A s the seventeenth century dawned, scarcely a  hundred years after Columbuss momentous landfall, the face of much of the New World had already been profoundly transformed.
European crops and livestock had begun to alter the very landscape, touching off an ecological revolution that would reverberate for centuries to come.
From Tierra del Fuego in the south to Hudson Bay in the north, disease and armed conquest had cruelly winnowed and disrupted the native peoples.
Several hundred thousand enslaved Africans toiled on Caribbean and Brazilian sugar plantations.
From Florida and New Mexico southward, most of the New World lay firmly within the grip of imperial Spain.
But   unexplored and effectively unclaimed by Europeans.
Then, as if to herald the coming century of colonization and conflict in the northern continent, three European powers planted three primitive outposts in three distant corners of the continent within three years of one another: the Spanish at Santa Fe in 1610, the French at Quebec in 1608, and, most consequentially for the future United States, the English at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607.
Feeble indeed were Englands efforts in the 1500s to compete with the sprawling Spanish Empire.
As Spains ally in the first half of the century, England took little interest in establishing its own overseas colonies.
Religious conflict, moreover, disrupted England in midcentury, after King Henry VIII broke with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, launching the English Protestant Reformation.
Catholics battled Protestants for decades, and the religious balance of power seesawed.
But after the Protestant Elizabeth ascended to the English throne in 1558, Protestantism became dominant in England, and rivalry with Catholic Spain intensified.
Ireland, which nominally had been under English rule since the twelfth century, became an early scene of that rivalry.
The Catholic Irish sought help from Catholic Spain to throw off the yoke of the new Protestant English queen.
But Spanish aid never amounted to much; in the 1570s and 1580s, Elizabeths troops crushed the Irish uprising with terrible ferocity, inflicting unspeakable atrocities upon the native Irish people.
The English crown confiscated Catholic Irish lands and planted them with new Protestant landlords from Scotland and England.
This policy also planted the seeds of the centuries-old religious conflicts that persist in Ireland to the present day.
Many English soldiers developed in Ireland a sneering contempt for the savage natives, an attitude that they brought with them to the New World.
Encouraged by the ambitious Queen Elizabeth, hardy English buccaneers now swarmed out upon the shipping lanes.
They sought to promote the twin goals of Protestantism and plunder by seizing Spanish treasure ships and raiding Spanish settlements, even though England and Spain were technically at peace.
The most famous of these semipiratical sea dogs was the courtly Francis Drake.
He plundered his way around the planet, returning in 1580 with his ship heavily ballasted with Spanish booty.
The venture netted profits of about 4,600 percent to his financial backers, among whom, in secret, was Queen Elizabeth.
Defying Spanish protest, she brazenly knighted Drake on the deck of his barnacled ship.
The bleak coast of Newfoundland was the scene of the first English attempt at colonization.
This effort collapsed when its promoter, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, lost his life at sea in 1583.
Gilberts ill-starred dream inspired his gallant half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh to try again in warmer climes.
Raleigh organized an expedition that first landed in 1585 on North Carolinas Roanoke Island, off the coast of  Virginiaa vaguely defined region named in honor of Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen.
After several false starts, the hapless Roanoke colony mysteriously vanished, swallowed up by the wilderness.
These pathetic English failures at colonization contrasted embarrassingly with the glories of the Spanish Empire, whose profits were fabulously enriching Spain.
Philip II of Spain, self-anointed foe of the Protestant Reformation, used part of his imperial gains to amass an Invincible Armada of ships for an invasion of England.
The showdown came in 1588, when the lumbering Spanish flotilla, 130 strong, hove into the English Channel.
The English sea dogs fought back.
Using craft that were swifter, more maneuverable, and more ably manned, they inflicted heavy damage on the cumbersome, overladen Spanish ships.
Then a devastating storm arose (the Protestant wind), scattering the crippled Spanish fleet.
The rout of the Spanish Armada marked the beginning of the end of Spanish imperial dreams, though Spains New World empire would not fully collapse for three more centuries.
Within a few C HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 decades, the Spanish Netherlands (Holland) would secure their independence, and much of the Spanish Caribbean would slip from Spains grasp.
Bloated by Peruvian and Mexican silver and cockily convinced of its own invincibility, Spain had overreached itself, sowing the seeds of its own decline.
Englands victory over the Spanish Armada also marked a red-letter day in American history.
It dampened Spains fighting spirit and helped ensure Englands naval dominance in the North Atlantic.
It started England on its way to becoming master of the world oceansa fact of enormous importance to the American people.
Indeed England now had many of the characteristics that Spain displayed on the eve of its colonizing adventure a century earlier: a strong, unified national state under a popular monarch; a measure of religious unity after a protracted struggle between Protestants and Catholics; and a vibrant sense of nationalism and national destiny.
A wondrous flowering of the English national spirit bloomed in the wake of the Spanish Armadas defeat.
A golden age of literature dawned in this exhilarating atmosphere, with Shakespeare, at its forefront, making occasional poetical references to Englands American colonies.
The English were seized with restlessness, with thirst for adventure, and with curiosity about the unknown.
Everywhere there blossomed a new spirit of self-confidence, of vibrant patriotism, and of boundless faith in the future of the English nation.
When England and Spain finally signed a treaty of peace in 1604, the English people were poised to plunge headlong into the planting of their own colonial empire in the New World.
Englands scepterd isle, as Shakespeare called it, throbbed with social and economic change as the seventeenth century opened.
Its population was mushrooming, from some 3 million people in 1550 to about 4 million in 1600.
In the ever-green English countryside, landlords were enclosing croplands for sheep grazing, forcing many small farmers into precarious tenancy or off the land altogether.
It was no accident that the woolen districts of eastern and western Englandwhere Puritanism had taken strong rootsupplied many of the earliest immigrants to America.
When economic depression hit the woolen trade in the late 1500s, thousands of footloose farmers took to the roads.
They drifted about England, chronically unemployed, often ending up as beggars and paupers in cities like Bristol and London.
This remarkably mobile population alarmed many contemporaries.
They concluded that England was burdened with a surplus population, though present-day London holds twice as many people as did all of England in 1600.
At the same time, laws of primogeniture decreed that only eldest sons were eligible to inherit landed estates.
Landholders ambitious younger sons, among them Gilbert, Raleigh, and Drake, were forced to seek their fortunes elsewhere.
Bad luck plagued their early, lone-wolf enterprises.
But by the early 1600s, the joint-stock company, forerunner of the modern corporation, was perfected.
It enabled a considerable number of investors, called adventurers, to pool their capital.
Peace with a chastened Spain provided the opportunity for English colonization.
Population growth provided the workers.
Unemployment, as well as a thirst for adventure, for markets, and for religious freedom, provided the motives.
Joint-stock companies provided the financial means.
The stage was now set for a historic effort to establish an English beachhead in the still uncharted North American wilderness.
In 1606, two years after peace with Spain, the hand of destiny beckoned toward Virginia.
A joint-stock company, known as the Virginia Company of London, received a charter from King James I of England for a settlement in the New World.
The main attraction was the promise of gold, combined with a strong desire to find a passage through America to the Indies.
Like most joint-stock companies of the day, the Virginia Company was intended to endure for only a few years, after which its stockholders hoped to liquidate it for a profit.
This arrangement put severe pressure on the luckless colonists, who were threatened with abandonment in the wilderness if they did not quickly strike it rich on the companys behalf.
Few of the investors thought in terms of long-term colonization.
Apparently no one even faintly suspected that the seeds of a mighty nation were being planted.
The charter of the Virginia Company is a significant document in American history.
It guaranteed to the overseas settlers the same rights of Englishmen that they would have enjoyed if they had stayed at home.
This precious boon was gradually extended to subsequent English colonies, helping to reinforce the colonists sense that even on the far shores of the Atlantic, they remained comfortably within the embrace of traditional English instituC HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 There is under our noses the great and ample country of Virginia; the inland whereof is found of late to be so sweet and wholesome a climate, so rich and abundant in silver mines, a better and richer country than Mexico itself.
If it shall please the Almighty to stir up Her Majestys heart to continue with transporting one or two thousand of her people, she shall by Gods assistance, in short space, increase her dominions, enrich her coffers, and reduce many pagans to the faith of Christ.
Sources of the Puritan Great Migration to New England, 16201650 The dark green areas indicate the main sources of the migration.
tions.
But ironically, a century and a half later, their insistence on the rights of Englishmen fed the hot resentment of the colonists against an increasingly meddlesome mother country and nourished their appetite for independence.
Setting sail in late 1606, the Virginia Companys three ships landed near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay, where Indians attacked them.
Pushing on up the bay, the tiny band of colonists eventually chose a location on the wooded and malarial banks of the James River, named in honor of King James I. The site was easy to defend, but it was mosquitoinfested and devastatingly unhealthful.
There, on May 24, 1607, about a hundred English settlers, all of them men, disembarked.
They called the place Jamestown.
The early years of Jamestown proved a nightmare for all concernedexcept the buzzards.
Forty would-be colonists perished during the initial voyage in 16061607.
Another expedition in 1609 lost its leaders and many of its precious supplies in a shipwreck off Bermuda.
Once ashore in Virginia, the settlers died by the dozens from disease, malnutrition, and starvation.
Ironically, the woods rustled with game and the rivers flopped with fish, but the greenhorn settlers, many of them self-styled gentlemen unaccustomed to fending for themselves, wasted valuable time grubbing for nonexistent gold when they should have been gathering provisions.
Virginia was saved from utter collapse at the start largely by the leadership and resourcefulness of an intrepid young adventurer, Captain John Smith.
Taking over in 1608, he whipped the goldhungry colonists into line with the rule, He who shall not work shall not eat.
He had been kidnapped in December 1607 and subjected to a mock execution by the Indian chieftain Powhatan, whose daughter Pocahontas had saved Smith by dramatically interposing her head between his and the war clubs of his captors.
The symbolism of this ritual was apparently intended to impress Smith with Powhatans power and with the Indians desire for peaceful relations with the Virginians.
Pocahontas became an intermediary between the Indians and the settlers, helping to preserve a shaky peace and to provide needed foodstuffs.
Still, the colonists died in droves, and living skeletons were driven to desperate acts.
They were reduced to eating dogges, Catts, Ratts, and Myce and even to digging up corpses for food.
One hungry man killed, salted, and ate his wife, for which misbehavior he was executed.
Of the four hundred settlers who managed to make it to Virginia by 1609, only sixty survived the starving time winter of 16091610.
Counterblast to Tobacco: A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinking fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of the pit [Hades] that is bottomless.
Henry VII, 14851509 Cabot voyages, 1497, 1498 Henry VIII, 15091547 English Reformation began Edward VI, 15471553 Strong Protestant tendencies Bloody Mary, 15531558 Catholic reaction Elizabeth I, 15581603 Break with Roman Catholic Church final;  Drake; Spanish Armada defeated *See p.
53 for a continuation of the table.
Diseased and despairing, the remaining colonists dragged themselves aboard homewardbound ships in the spring of 1610, only to be met at the mouth of the James River by a long-awaited relief party headed by a new governor, Lord De La Warr.
He ordered the settlers back to Jamestown, imposed a harsh military regime on the colony, and soon undertook aggressive military action against the Indians.
Disease continued to reap a gruesome harvest among the Virginians.
By 1625 Virginia contained only some twelve hundred hard-bitten survivors of the nearly eight thousand adventurers who had tried to start life anew in the ill-fated colony.
When the English landed in 1607, the chieftain Powhatan dominated the native peoples living in the James River area.
He had asserted supremacy over a few dozen small tribes, loosely affiliated in what somewhat grandly came to be called Powhatans Confederacy.
The English colonists dubbed all the local Indians, somewhat inaccurately, the Powhatans.
Powhatan at first may have considered the English potential allies in his struggle to extend his power still further over his Indian rivals, and he tried to be conciliatory.
But relations between the Indians and the English remained tense, especially as the starving colonists took to raiding Indian food supplies.
The atmosphere grew even more strained after Lord De La Warr arrived in 1610.
He carried orders from the Virginia Company that amounted to a declaration of war against the Indians in the Jamestown region.
A veteran of the vicious campaigns against the Irish, De La Warr now introduced Irish tactics against the Indians.
His troops raided Indian villages, burned houses, confiscated provisions, and torched cornfields.
A peace settlement ended this First Anglo-Powhatan War in 1614, sealed by the marriage of Pocahontas to the colonist John Rolfe the first known interracial union in Virginia.
A fragile respite followed, which endured eight years.
But the Indians, pressed by the land-hungry whites and ravaged by European diseases, struck back in 1622.
A series of Indian attacks left 347 settlers dead, including John Rolfe.
In response the Virginia Company issued new orders calling for a perpetual war without peace or truce, one that would prevent the Indians from being any longer  a people.
Periodic punitive raids systematically reduced the native population and drove the survivors ever farther westward.
In the Second Anglo-Powhatan War in 1644, the Indians made one last effort to dislodge the VirginiC HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 be disarmed [and] have his arms broken and his tongue bored through with an awl [and] shall pass through a guard of 40 men and shall be butted [with muskets] by every one of them and at the head of the troop kicked down and footed out of the fort.
ans.
They were again defeated.
The peace treaty of 1646 repudiated any hope of assimilating the native peoples into Virginian society or of peacefully coexisting with them.
Instead it effectively banished the Chesapeake Indians from their ancestral lands and formally separated Indian from white areas of settlementthe origins of the later reservation system.
By 1669 an official census revealed that only about two thousand Indians remained in Virginia, perhaps 10 percent of the population the original English settlers had encountered in 1607.
By 1685 the English considered the Powhatan peoples extinct.
It had been the Powhatans calamitous misfortune to fall victim to three Ds: disease, disorganization, and disposability.
Like native peoples throughout the New World, they were extremely susceptible to European-borne maladies.
Epidemics of smallpox and measles raced mercilessly through their villages.
The Powhatans alsodespite the apparent cohesiveness of Powhatans Confederacylacked the unity with which to make effective opposition to the comparatively well-organized and militarily disciplined whites.
Finally, unlike the Indians whom the Spaniards had encountered to the south, who could be put to work in the mines and had gold and silver to trade, the Powhatans served no economic function for the Virginia colonists.
They provided no reliable labor source and, after the Virginians began growing their own food crops, had no valuable commodities to offer in commerce.
The natives therefore could be disposed of without harm to the colonial economy.
Indeed the Indian presence frustrated the colonists desire for a local commodity the Europeans desperately wanted: land.
The fate of the Powhatans foreshadowed the destinies of indigenous peoples throughout the continent as the process of European settlement went forward.
Native Americans, of course, had a history well before Columbuss arrival.
They were no strangers to change, adaptation, and even catastrophe, as the rise and decline of civilizations such as the Mississippians and the Anasazis demonstrated.
But the shock of large-scale European colonization disrupted Native American life on a vast scale, inducing unprecedented demographic and cultural transformations.
Some changes were fairly benign.
Horses stolen, strayed, or purchased from Spanish invaderscatalyzed a substantial Indian migration onto the Great Plains in the eighteenth century.
Peoples such as the Lakotas (Sioux), who had previously been sedentary forest dwellers, now moved onto the wide-open plains.
There they thrived impressively, adopting an entirely new way of life as mounted nomadic hunters.
But the effects of contact with Europeans proved less salutary for most other native peoples.
Disease was by far the biggest disrupter, as Old World pathogens licked lethally through biologically defenseless Indian populations.
Disease took more than human life; it extinguished entire cultures and occasionally helped shape new ones.
Epidemics often robbed native peoples of the elders who preserved the oral traditions that held clans together.
Devastated Indian bands then faced the daunting task of literally reinventing themselves without benefit of accumulated wisdom or kin networks.
The decimation and forced migration of native peoples sometimes scrambled them together in wholly new ways.
The Catawba nation of the southern piedmont region, for example, was formed from splintered remnants of several different groups uprooted by the shock of the Europeans arrival.
Trade also transformed Indian life, as traditional barter-and-exchange networks gave way to the temptations of European commerce.
Firearms, for example, conferred enormous advantages on those who could purchase them from Europeans.
The desire for firearms thus intensified competition among the tribes for access to prime hunting grounds that could supply the skins and pelts that the European arms traders wanted.
The result was an escalating cycle of Indian-on-Indian violence, fueled by the lure and demands of European trade goods.
Native Americans were swept up in the expanding Atlantic economy, but they usually struggled in vain to control their own place in it.
One desperate band of Virginia Indians, resentful at the prices offered by British traders for their deerskins, loaded a fleet of canoes with hides and tried to paddle to England to sell their goods directly.
Not far from the Virginia shore, a storm swamped their frail craft.
Their cargo lost, the few  survivors were picked up by an English ship and sold into slavery in the West Indies.
Indians along the Atlantic seaboard felt the most ferocious effects of European contact.
Farther inland, native peoples had the advantages of time, space, and numbers as they sought to adapt to the European incursion.
The Algonquians in the Great Lakes area, for instance, became a substantial regional power.
They bolstered their population by absorbing various surrounding bands and dealt from a position of strength with the few Europeans who managed to penetrate the interior.
As a result, a British or French trader wanting to do business with the inland tribes had little choice but to conform to Indian ways, often taking an Indian wife.
Thus was created a middle ground, a zone where both Europeans and Native Americans were compelled to accommodate to one anotherat least until the Europeans began to arrive in large numbers.
John Rolfe, the husband of Pocahontas, became father of the tobacco industry and an economic savior of the Virginia colony.
By 1612 he had perfected methods of raising and curing the pungent weed, eliminating much of the bitter tang.
Soon the European demand for tobacco was nearly insatiable.
A tobacco rush swept over Virginia, as crops were planted in the streets of Jamestown and even between the numerous graves.
So exclusively did the colonists concentrate on planting the yellow leaf that at first they had to import some of their foodstuffs.
Colonists who had once hungered for food now hungered for land, ever more land on which to plant ever more tobacco.
Relentlessly, they pressed the frontier of settlement up the river valleys to the west, abrasively edging against the Indians.
Virginias prosperity was finally built on tobacco smoke.
This bewitching weed played a vital role in putting the colony on firm economic foundations.
But tobaccoKing Nicotinewas something of a C HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 When an Indian child has been brought up among us, taught our language and habituated to our customs, yet if he goes to see his relations and make one Indian ramble with them, there is no persuading him ever to return.
[But] when white persons of either sex have been taken prisoners by the Indians, and lived awhile among them, though ransomed by their friends, and treated with all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay among the English, yet in a short time they become disgusted with our manner of life, and the care and pains that are necessary to support it, and take the first good opportunity of escaping again into the woods, from whence there is no reclaiming them.
tyrant.
It was ruinous to the soil when greedily planted in successive years, and it enchained the fortunes of Virginia to the fluctuating price of a  single crop.
Fatefully, tobacco also promoted the broad-acred plantation system and with it a brisk demand for fresh labor.
In 1619, the year before the Plymouth Pilgrims landed in New England, what was described as a Dutch warship appeared off Jamestown and sold some twenty Africans.
The scanty record does not reveal whether they were purchased as lifelong slaves or as servants committed to limited years of servitude.
However it transpired, this simple commercial transaction planted the seeds of the North American slave system.
Yet blacks were too costly for most of the hard-pinched white colonists to acquire, and for decades few were brought to Virginia.
In 1650 Virginia counted but three hundred blacks, although by the end of the century blacks, most of them enslaved, made up approximately 14 percent of the colonys population.
Representative self-government was also born in primitive Virginia, in the same cradle with slavery and in the same year1619.
The London Company authorized the settlers to summon an assembly, known as the House of Burgesses.
A momentous precedent was thus feebly established, for this assemblage was the first of many miniature parliaments to flourish in the soil of America.
As time passed, James I grew increasingly hostile to Virginia.
He detested tobacco, and he distrusted the representative House of Burgesses, which he branded a seminary of sedition.
In 1624 he revoked the charter of the bankrupt and beleaguered Virginia Company, thus making Virginia a royal colony directly under his control.
Marylandthe second plantation colony but the fourth English colony to be plantedwas founded in 1634 by Lord Baltimore, of a prominent English Catholic family.
He embarked upon the venture partly to reap financial profits and partly to create a refuge for his fellow Catholics.
Protestant England For our Shippe was so pestered with people and goods that we were so full of infection that after a while we saw little but throwing folkes over board: It pleased god to send me my helth till I came to shoare and 3 dayes after I fell sick but I thank god I am well recovered.
Few else are left alive that came in that Shippe.
was still persecuting Roman Catholics; among numerous discriminations, a couple seeking wedlock could not be legally married by a Catholic priest.
Absentee proprietor Lord Baltimore hoped that the two hundred settlers who founded Maryland at St.
Marys, on Chesapeake Bay, would be the vanguard of a vast new feudal domain.
Huge estates were to be awarded to his largely Catholic relatives, and gracious manor houses, modeled on those of Englands aristocracy, were intended to arise amidst the fertile forests.
As in Virginia, colonists proved willing to come only if offered the opportunity to acquire land of their own.
Soon they were dispersed around the Chesapeake region on modest farms, and the haughty land barons, mostly Catholic, were surrounded by resentful backcountry planters, mostly Protestant.
Resentment flared into open rebellion near the end of the century, and the Baltimore family for a time lost its proprietary rights.
Despite these tensions Maryland prospered.
Like Virginia, it blossomed forth in acres of tobacco.
Also like Virginia, it depended for labor in its early years mainly on white indentured servantspenniless persons who bound themselves to work for a number of years to pay their passage.
In both colonies it was only in the later years of the seventeenth century that black slaves began to be imported in large numbers.
Lord Baltimore, a canny soul, permitted unusual freedom of worship at the outset.
He hoped that he would thus purchase toleration for his own fellow worshipers.
But the heavy tide of Protestants threatened to submerge the Catholics and place severe restrictions on them, as in England.
Faced with disaster, the Catholics of Maryland threw their support behind the famed Act of Toleration, which was passed in 1649 by the local representative assembly.
Marylands new religious statute guaranteed toleration to all Christians.
But, less liberally, it decreed the death penalty for those, like Jews and atheists, who denied the divinity of Jesus.
The law thus sanctioned less toleration than had previously existed in the settlement, but it did extend a temporary cloak of protection to the uneasy Catholic minority.
One result was that when the colonial era ended, Maryland probably sheltered more Roman Catholics than any other English-speaking colony in the New World.
While the English were planting the first frail colonial shoots in the Chesapeake, they also were busily colonizing the West Indies.
Spain, weakened by military overextension and distracted by its rebellious Dutch provinces, relaxed its grip on much of the Caribbean in the early 1600s.
By the mid-seventeenth century, England had secured its claim to several West Indian islands, including the large prize of Jamaica in 1655.
Sugar formed the foundation of the West Indian economy.
What tobacco was to the Chesapeake, sugar cane was to the Caribbeanwith one crucial difference.
Tobacco was a poor mans crop.
It could be planted easily, it produced commercially marketable leaves within a year, and it required only simple processing.
Sugar cane, in contrast, was a rich mans crop.
It had to be planted extensively to yield commercially viable quantities of sugar.
Extensive planting, in turn, required extensive and arduous land clearing.
And the cane stalks yielded their sugar only after an elaborate process of refining in a sugar C HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 Early Maryland and Virginia Jamestown (1607) St.
Marys (1634) V I R G I N I A M A R Y L A N D (1580s) Limit of original grant to Lord Baltimore Present boundary of Maryland mill.
The need for land and for the labor to clear it and to run the mills made sugar cultivation a capitalintensive business.
Only wealthy growers with abundant capital to invest could succeed in sugar.
The sugar lords extended their dominion over the West Indies in the seventeenth century.
To work their sprawling plantations, they imported enormous numbers of African slavesmore than a quarter of a million in the five decades after 1640.
By about 1700, black slaves outnumbered white settlers in the English West Indies by nearly four to one, and the regions population has remained predominantly black ever since.
West Indians thus take their place among the numerous children of the African diasporathe vast scattering of African peoples throughout the New World in the three and a half centuries following Columbuss discovery.
To control this large and potentially restive population of slaves, English authorities devised formal codes that defined the slaves legal status and  The Negroes are so wilful and loth to leave their own country, that have often leapd out of the canoes, boat and ship, into the sea, and kept under water till they were drowned, to avoid being taken up and saved by our boats, which pursued them; they having a more dreadful apprehension of Barbadoes than we can have of hell.
masters prerogatives.
The notorious Barbados slave code of 1661 denied even the most fundamental rights to slaves and gave masters virtually complete control over their laborers, including the right  to inflict vicious punishments for even slight  infractions.
The profitable sugar-plantation system soon crowded out almost all other forms of Caribbean agriculture.
The West Indies increasingly depended on the North American mainland for foodstuffs and other basic supplies.
And smaller English farmers, squeezed out by the greedy sugar barons, began to migrate to the newly founded southern mainland colonies.
A group of displaced English settlers from Barbados arrived in Carolina in 1670.
They brought with them a few African slaves, as well as the model of the Barbados slave code, which eventually inspired statutes governing slavery throughout the mainland colonies.
Carolina officially adopted a version of the Barbados slave code in 1696.
Just as the West Indies had been a testing ground for the Mexico and South America, so the Caribbean islands now served as a staging area for the slave system that would take root elsewhere in English North America.
Civil war convulsed England in the 1640s.
King Charles I had dismissed Parliament in 1629, and when he eventually recalled it in 1640, the members were mutinous.
Finding their great champion in the Puritan-soldier Oliver Cromwell, they ultimately beheaded Charles in 1649, and Cromwell ruled England for nearly a decade.
Finally, Charles II, son of the decapitated king, was restored to the throne in 1660.
Colonization had been interrupted during this period of bloody unrest.
Now, in the so-called Restoration period, empire building resumed with even greater intensityand royal involvement.
Carolina, named for Charles II, was formally created in 1670, after the king granted to eight of his court favorites, the Lords Proprietors, an expanse of wilderness ribboning across the continent to the Pacific.
These aristocratic founders hoped to grow foodstuffs to provision the sugar plantations in Barbados and to export non-English products like wine, silk, and olive oil.
Carolina prospered by developing close economic ties with the flourishing sugar islands of the English West Indies.
In a broad sense, the mainland colony was but the most northerly of those outC HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 If any Negro or slave whatsoever shall offer any violence to any Christian by striking or the like, such Negro or slave shall for his or her first offence be severely whipped by the Constable.
For his second offence of that nature he shall be severely whipped, his nose slit, and be burned in some part of his face with a hot iron.
And being brutish slaves, [they] deserve not, for the baseness of their condition, to be tried by the legal trial of twelve men of their peers, as the subjects of England are.
And it is further enacted and ordained that if any Negro or other slave under punishment by his master unfortunately shall suffer in life or member, which seldom happens, no person whatsoever shall be liable to any fine therefore.
posts.
Many original Carolina settlers in fact had emigrated from Barbados, bringing that islands slave system with them.
They also established a vigorous slave trade in Carolina itself.
Enlisting the aid of the coastal Savannah Indians, they forayed into the interior in search of captives.
The Lords Proprietors in London protested against Indian slave trading in their colony, but to no avail.
Manacled Indians soon were among the young colonys major exports.
As many as ten thousand Indians were dispatched to lifelong labor in the West Indian canefields and sugar mills.
Others were sent to New England.
One Rhode Island town in 1730 counted more than two hundred Indian slaves from Carolina in its midst.
In 1707 the Savannah Indians decided to end their alliance with the Carolinians and to migrate to the backcountry of Maryland and Pennsylvania, where a new colony founded by Quakers under William Penn promised better relations between whites and Indians.
But the Carolinians determined to thin the Savannahs before they could depart.
A series of bloody raids all but annihilated the Indian tribes of coastal Carolina by 1710.
1606 Royal (under the crown) 1.
Virginia London Co.
1607 1609 1624 1612 2.
New Hampshire John Mason 1623 1679 1679 Royal (absorbed by Mass.,  and others 16411679) 3.
Massachusetts Puritans c.
1628 1629 1691 Royal Plymouth Separatists 1620 None (Merged with Mass., 1691) Maine F. Gorges 1623 1639 (Bought by Mass., 1677) 4.
Maryland Lord Baltimore 1634 1632  Proprietary (controlled by proprietor) 5.
Connecticut Mass.
emigrants 1635 1662  Self-governing (under local control) New Haven Mass.
emigrants 1638 None (Merged with Conn., 1662) 6.
Rhode Island R. Williams 1636 1644  Self-governing 1663 7.
Delaware Swedes 1638 None  Proprietary (merged with Pa., 1682; same governor, but separate assembly,  granted 1703) 8.
N. Carolina Virginians 1653 1663 1729 Royal (separated informally from S.C., 1691) 9.
New York Dutch c.
1613 Duke of York 1664 1664 1685 Royal 10.
New Jersey Berkeley and 1664 None 1702 Royal Carteret 11.
Carolina Eight nobles 1670 1663 1729 Royal (separated formally from N.C., 1712) 12.
Pennsylvania William Penn 1681 1681  Proprietary 13.
Georgia Oglethorpe and  1733 1732 1752 Royal others { { After much experimentation, rice emerged as the principal export crop in Carolina.
Rice was then an exotic food in England; no rice seeds were sent out from London in the first supply ships to Carolina.
But rice was grown in Africa, and the Carolinians were soon paying premium prices for West African slaves experienced in rice cultivation.
The Africans agricultural skill and their relative immunity to malaria (thanks to a genetic trait that also, unfortunately, made them and their descendants susceptible to sickle-cell anemia) made them ideal laborers on the hot and swampy rice plantations.
By 1710 they constituted a majority of Carolinians.
Moss-festooned Charles Townalso named for the kingrapidly became the busiest seaport in the South.
Many high-spirited sons of English landed families, deprived of an inheritance, came to the Charleston area and gave it a rich aristocratic flavor.
The village became a colorfully diverse community, to which French Protestant refugees and others were attracted by religious toleration.
Nearby, in Florida, the Catholic Spaniards abhorred the intrusion of these Protestant heretics.
Carolinas frontier was often aflame.
Spanishincited Indians brandished their tomahawks, and armor-clad warriors of Spain frequently unsheathed their swords during the successive Anglo-Spanish wars.
But by 1700 Carolina was too strong to be wiped out.
The wild northern expanse of the huge Carolina grant bordered on Virginia.
From the older colony there drifted down a ragtag group of povertystricken outcasts and religious dissenters.
Many of them had been repelled by the rarefied atmosphere of Virginia, dominated as it was by big-plantation gentry belonging to the Church of England.
North Carolinians, as a result, have been called the quintessence of Virginias discontent.
The newcomers, who frequently were squatters without legal right to the soil, raised their tobacco and other crops on small farms, with little need for slaves.
Distinctive traits developed rapidly in North Carolina.
The poor but sturdy inhabitants, regarded as riffraff by their snobbish neighbors, earned a reputation for being irreligious and hospitable to pirates.
Isolated from neighbors by raw wilderness and stormy Cape Hatteras, graveyard of the Atlantic, the North Carolinians developed a strong spirit of resistance to authority.
Their location between aristocratic Virginia and aristocratic South Carolina caused the area to be dubbed a vale of humility between two mountains of conceit.
Following much friction with governors, North Carolina was officially separated from South Carolina in 1712, and subsequently each segment became a royal colony.
North Carolina shares with tiny Rhode Island several distinctions.
These two outposts were the most democratic, the most independent-minded, and the least aristocratic of the original thirteen English colonies.
Although northern Carolina, unlike the colonys southern reaches, did not at first import large numbers of African slaves, both regions shared in the ongoing tragedy of bloody relations between Indians and Europeans.
Tuscarora Indians fell upon the fledgling settlement at Newbern in 1711.
The North Carolinians, aided by their heavily armed brothers from the south, retaliated by crushing the Tuscaroras in battle, selling hundreds of them into slavery and leaving the survivors to wander northward to seek the protection of the Iroquois.
The Tuscaroras eventually became the Sixth Nation of the Iroquois Confederacy.
In another ferocious encounter four years later, the South Carolinians defeated and dispersed the Yamasee Indians.
C HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 Roanoke Island 1585 Cape Hatteras Jamestown 1607 Newbern 1710 Charleston 1670 Savannah 1733 SPANISH FLORIDA VIRGINIA  NORTH CAROLINA 1712 SOUTH CAROLINA 1670 GEORGIA 1733 Added to Georgia 1763 Early Carolina and Georgia Settlements With the conquest of the Yamasees, virtually all the coastal Indian tribes in the southern colonies had been utterly devastated by about 1720.
Yet  in the interior, in the hills and valleys of the Appalachian Mountains, the powerful Cherokees, Creeks, and Iroquois (see Makers of America: The Iroquois, pp.
4041) remained.
Stronger and more numerous than their coastal cousins, they managed for half a century more to contain British settlement to the coastal plain east of the mountains.
Pine-forested Georgia, with the harbor of Savannah nourishing its chief settlement, was formally founded in 1733.
It proved to be the last of the thirteen colonies to be planted126 years after the first, Virginia, and 52 years after the twelfth, Pennsylvania.
Chronologically Georgia belongs elsewhere, but geographically it may be grouped with its southern neighbors.
The English crown intended Georgia to serve chiefly as a buffer.
It would protect the more valuable Carolinas against vengeful Spaniards from Florida and against the hostile French from Louisiana.
Georgia indeed suffered much buffeting, especially when wars broke out between Spain and England in the European arena.
As a vital link in imperial defense, the exposed colony received monetary subsidies from the British government at the outsetthe only one of the original thirteen to enjoy this benefit in its founding stage.
Named in honor of King George II of England, Georgia was launched by a high-minded group of philanthropists.
In addition to protecting their neighboring northern colonies and producing silk and wine, they were determined to carve out a haven for wretched souls imprisoned for debt.
They were also determined, at least at first, to keep slavery out of Georgia.
The ablest of the founders was the dynamic soldier-statesman James Oglethorpe, who became keenly interested in prison reform after one of his friends died in a debtors jail.
As an able military leader, Oglethorpe repelled Spanish attacks.
As an imperialist and a philanthropist, he saved the Charity Colony by his energetic leadership and by heavily mortgaging his own personal fortune.
The hamlet of Savannah, like Charleston, was a melting-pot community.
German Lutherans and kilted Scots Highlanders, among others, added color to the pattern.
All Christian worshipers except Catholics enjoyed religious toleration.
Many missionaries armed with Bibles and hope arrived in Savannah to work among debtors and Indians.
Prominent among them was young John Wesley, who later returned to England and founded the Methodist Church.
Georgia grew with painful slowness and at the end of the colonial era was perhaps the least populous of the colonies.
The development of a plantation economy was thwarted by an unhealthful climate, by early restrictions on black slavery, and by demoralizing Spanish attacks.
Certain distinctive features were shared by Englands southern mainland colonies: Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
Broad-acred, these outposts of empire were all in some degree devoted to exporting commercial agricultural products.
Profitable staple crops were the rule, notably tobacco and rice, though to a lesser extent in small-farm North Carolina.
Slavery was found in all the plantation colonies, though only after 1750 in reform-minded Georgia.
Immense acreage in the hands of a favored few fostered a strong aristocratic atmosphere, except in North Carolina and to some extent in debtor-tinged Georgia.
The wide scattering of plantations and farms, often along stately rivers, retarded the growth of cities and made the establishment of churches and schools both difficult and expensive.
In 1671 the governor of Virginia thanked God that no free schools or printing presses existed in his colony.
All the plantation colonies permitted some religious toleration.
The tax-supported Church of England became the dominant faith, though weakest of all in nonconformist North Carolina.
These colonies were in some degree expansionary.
Soil butchery by excessive tobacco growing drove settlers westward, and the long, lazy rivers invited penetration of the continentand continuing confrontation with  Native Americans.
ell before the crowned heads of Europe turned their eyes and their dreams of empire toward North America, a great military power had emerged in the Mohawk Valley of what is now New York State.
The Iroquois Confederacy, dubbed by whites the League of the Iroquois, bound together five Indian nationsthe Mohawks, the Oneidas, the Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas.
According to Iroquois legend, it was founded in the late 1500s by two leaders, Deganawidah and Hiawatha.
This proud and potent league vied initially with neighboring Indians for territorial supremacy, then with the French, English, and Dutch for control of the fur trade.
Ultimately, infected by the white mans diseases, intoxicated by his whiskey, and intimidated by his muskets, the Iroquois struggled for their very survival as a people.
The building block of Iroquois society was the longhouse (see photo p.
41).
This wooden structure deserved its descriptive name.
Only twenty-five feet in breadth, the longhouse stretched from eight to two hundred feet in length.
Each building contained three to five fireplaces around which gathered two nuclear families, consisting of parents and children.
All families residing in the longhouse were related, their connections of blood running exclusively through the maternal line.
A single longhouse might shelter a womans family and those of her mother, sisters, and daughterswith the oldest woman N E W     F R A N C E NEW  ENGLAND D N A L R E H T E N W E N Montreal Quebec New Amsterdam Fort Orange 0 100 Miles 50 0 100 Kilometers 50 Iroquois Lands and European Trade Centers,  c.
15901650 being the honored matriarch.
When a man married, he left his childhood hearth in the home  of his mother to join the longhouse of his wife.
Men dominated in Iroquois society, but they owed their positions of prominence to their mothers families.
As if sharing one great longhouse, the five nations joined in the Iroquois Confederacy but kept their own separate fires.
Although they celebrated together and shared a common policy toward outsiders, they remained essentially independent of one another.
On the eastern flank of the league, the Mohawks, known as the Keepers of the Eastern Fire, specialized as middlemen with European traders, whereas the outlying Senecas, the Keepers of the Western Fire, became fur suppliers.
After banding together to end generations of violent warfare among themselves, the Five Nations vanquished their rivals, the neighboring Hurons, Eries, and Petuns.
Some other tribes, such as the Tuscaroras from the Carolina region, sought peaceful absorption into the Iroquois Confederacy.
The Iroquois further expanded their numbers by means of periodic mourning wars, whose objective was the large-scale adoption of captives and refugees.
But the arrival of gun-toting Europeans threatened Iroquois supremacy and enmeshed the confederacy in a tangled web of diplomatic intrigues.
Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, they allied alternately with the English against the French and vice versa, for a time successfully working this perpetual rivalry to their own advantage.
But when the American Revolution broke out, the confederacy could reach no consensus on which side to support.
Each tribe was left to decide independently; most, though not all, sided with the British.
The ultimate British defeat left the confederacy in tatters.
Many Iroquois, especially the Mohawks, moved to new lands in British Canada; others were relegated to reservations in western New York.
Reservation life proved unbearable for a proud people accustomed to domination over a vast territory.
Morale sank; brawling, feuding, and alcoholism became rampant.
Out of this morass arose a prophet, an Iroquois called Handsome Lake.
In 1799 angelic figures clothed in traditional Iroquois garb appeared to Handsome Lake in a vision and warned him that the moral decline of his people must end if they were to endure.
He awoke from his vision to warn his tribespeople to mend their ways.
His socially oriented gospel inspired many Iroquois to forsake alcohol, to affirm family values, and to revive old Iroquois customs.
Handsome Lake died in 1815, but his teachings, in the form of the Longhouse religion, survive to this day.
C HAPTER 2 The Planting of English America, 15001733 Elizabeth I becomes queen of England English crush Irish uprising Drake circumnavigates the globe Raleigh founds Roanoke colony England defeats Spanish Armada James I becomes king of England Spain and England sign peace treaty Virginia colony founded at Jamestown Rolfe perfects tobacco culture in Virginia First Anglo-Powhatan War ends First Africans arrive in Jamestown  Virginia House of Burgesses established Virginia becomes royal colony Maryland colony founded Large-scale slave-labor system  established in English West Indies Second Anglo-Powhatan War Act of Toleration in Maryland Charles I beheaded; Cromwell rules  England Charles II restored to English throne Barbados slave code adopted Carolina colony created Tuscarora War in North Carolina North Carolina formally separates from  South Carolina Yamasee War in South Carolina Georgia colony founded For further reading, see page A1 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Settling the  Northern Colonies  16191700 W ILLIAM S TOUGHTON [ OF M ASSACHUSETTS B AY ], 1699 A lthough colonists both north and south were bound together by a common language and a common allegiance to Mother England, they established different patterns of settlement, different economies, different political systems, and even different sets of valuesdefining distinctive regional characteristics that would persist for generations.
The promise of richesespecially from goldenleaved tobaccodrew the first settlers to the southern colonies.
But to the north, in the fertile valleys of the middle Atlantic region and especially along the rocky shores of New England, it was not worldly wealth but religious devotion that principally shaped the earliest settlements.
Little did the German friar Martin Luther suspect, when he nailed his protests against Catholic doctrines to the door of Wittenbergs cathedral in 1517, that he was shaping the destiny of a yet unknown nation.
Denouncing the authority of priests and popes, Luther declared that the Bible alone was the source of Gods word.
He ignited a fire of religious reform (the Protestant Reformation) that licked its way across Europe for more than a century, dividing peoples, toppling sovereigns, and kindling the spiritual fervor of millions of men and womensome of whom helped to found America.
The reforming flame burned especially brightly in the bosom of John Calvin of Geneva.
This somber and severe religious leader elaborated Martin Luthers ideas in ways that profoundly affected the thought and character of generations of Americans yet unborn.
Calvinism became the dominant  theological credo not only of the New England  Puritans but of other American settlers as well,  including the Scottish Presbyterians, French Huguenots, and communicants of the Dutch Reformed Church.
Calvin spelled out his basic doctrine in a learned Latin tome of 1536, entitled  powerful and all-good.
Humans, because of the corrupting effect of original sin, were weak and wicked.
God was also all-knowingand he knew who was going to heaven and who was going to hell.
Since the first moment of creation, some soulsthe   bliss and others for eternal torment.
Good works could not save those whom predestination had marked for the infernal fires.
But neither could the elect count on their predetermined salvation and lead lives of wild, immoral abandon.
For one thing, no one could be certain of his or her status in the heavenly ledger.
Gnawing doubts about their eternal fate plagued Calvinists.
They constantly sought, in themselves and others, signs of conversion, or the receipt of Gods free gift of saving grace.
Conversion was thought to be an intense, identifiable personal experience in which God revealed to the elect their heavenly destiny.
Thereafter they were expected  to lead sanctified lives, demonstrating by their holy behavior that they were among the visible saints.
These doctrines swept into England just as King Henry VIII was breaking his ties with the Roman Catholic Church in the 1530s, making himself the head of the Church of England.
Henry would have been content to retain Roman rituals and creeds, but his action powerfully stimulated some English religious reformers to undertake a total purification of English Christianity.
Many of these Puritans, as it happened, came from the commercially depressed woolen districts (see p.
28).
Calvinism, with its message of stark but reassuring order in the divine plan, fed on this social unrest and provided spiritual comfort to the economically disadvantaged.
As time went on, Puritans grew increasingly unhappy over the snail-like progress of the Protestant Reformation in England.
They burned with pious zeal to see the Church of England wholly  de-catholicized.
The most devout Puritans, including those who eventually settled New England, believed that only visible saints (that is, persons who felt the  stirrings of grace in their souls and could demonstrate its presence to their fellow Puritans) should be admitted to church membership.
But the Church of England enrolled all the kings subjects, which meant that the saints had to share pews and communion rails with the damned.
Appalled by this unholy fraternizing, a tiny group of dedicated Puritans, known as Separatists, vowed to break away entirely from the Church of England.
King James I, a shrewd Scotsman, was head of both the state and the church in England from 1603 to 1625.
He quickly perceived that if his subjects could defy him as their spiritual leader, they might one day defy him as their political leader (as in fact they would later defy and behead his son, Charles I).
He therefore threatened to  harass the more bothersome Separatists out of the land.
The most famous congregation of Separatists, fleeing royal wrath, departed for Holland in 1608.
During the ensuing twelve years of toil and poverty, they were increasingly distressed by the Dutchification of their children.
They longed to find a haven where they could live and die as English men and womenand as purified Protestants.
America was the logical refuge, despite the early ordeals of Jamestown, and despite tales of New World cannibals roasting steaks from their white victims over open fires.
A group of the Separatists in Holland, after negotiating with the Virginia Company, at length secured rights to settle under its jurisdiction.
But their crowded  missed its destination and arrived off the stony coast of New England in 1620, with a total of 102 persons.
One had died en routean unusually short casualty listand one had been born and appropriately named Oceanus.
Fewer than half of the entire party were Separatists.
Prominent among the nonbelongers was a peppery and stocky soldier of fortune, Captain Myles Standish, dubbed by one of his critics Captain Shrimp.
He later rendered indispensable service as an Indian fighter and negotiator.
The Pilgrims did not make their initial landing at Plymouth Rock, as commonly supposed, but undertook a number of preliminary surveys.
They finally chose for their site the shore of inhospitable Plymouth Bay.
This area was outside the domain of the Virginia Company, and consequently the settlers became squatters.
They were without legal right to the land and without specific authority to establish a government.
C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 Before disembarking, the Pilgrim leaders drew up and signed the brief Mayflower Compact.
Although setting an invaluable precedent for later written constitutions, this document was not a constitution at all.
It was a simple agreement to form a crude government and to submit to the will of the majority under the regulations agreed upon.
The compact was signed by forty-one adult males, eleven of them with the exalted rank of mister, though not by the servants and two seamen.
The pact was a promising step toward genuine self-government,  for soon the adult male settlers were assembling to make their own laws in open-discussion town meetingsa great laboratory of liberty.
The Pilgrims first winter of 16201621 took a grisly toll.
Only 44 out of the 102 survived.
At one time only 7 were well enough to lay the dead in their frosty graves.
Yet when the  England in the spring, not a single one of the courageous band of Separatists left.
As one of them wrote, It is not with us as with other men, whom small things can discourage.
God made his children prosperous, so the Pilgrims believed.
The next autumn, that of 1621, brought bountiful harvests and with them the first Thanksgiving Day in New England.
In time the frail colony found sound economic legs in fur, fish, and lumber.
The beaver and the Bible were the early mainstays: the one for the sustenance of the body, the other for the sustenance of the soul.
Plymouth proved that the English could maintain themselves in this uninviting region.
The Pilgrims were extremely fortunate in their leaders.
Prominent among them was the cultured William Bradford, a self-taught scholar who read Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, and Dutch.
He was chosen governor thirty times in the annual elections.
Among his major worries was his fear that independent, non-Puritan settlers on their particular might corrupt his godly experiment in the Plymouth Plantation, Thus out of small beginnings greater things have been produced by His hand that made all things of nothing, and gives being to all things that are; and, as one small candle may light a thousand, so the light here kindled hath shone unto many, yea in some sort to our whole nation.
wilderness.
Bustling fishing villages and other settlements did sprout to the north of Plymouth, on the storm-lashed shores of Massachusetts Bay, where many people were as much interested in cod as God.
Quiet and quaint, the little colony of Plymouth was never important economically or numerically.
Its population numbered only seven thousand by 1691, when, still charterless, it merged with its giant neighbor, the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
But the tiny settlement of Pilgrims was big both morally and spiritually.
The Separatist Pilgrims were dedicated extremists the purest Puritans.
More moderate Puritans sought to reform the Church of England from within.
Though resented by bishops and monarchs, they slowly gathered support, especially in Parliament.
But when Charles I dismissed Parliament in 1629 and sanctioned the anti-Puritan persecutions of the reactionary Archbishop William Laud, many Puritans saw catastrophe in the making.
In 1629 an energetic group of non-Separatist Puritans, fearing for their faith and for Englands future, secured a royal charter to form the Massachusetts Bay Company.
They proposed to establish a sizable settlement in the infertile Massachusetts area, with Boston soon becoming its hub.
Stealing a march on both king and church, the newcomers brought their charter with them.
For many years they used it as a kind of constitution, out of easy reach of royal authority.
They steadfastly denied that they wanted to separate from the Church of England, only from its impurities.
But back in England, the highly orthodox Archbishop Laud snorted that the Bay Colony Puritans were swine which rooted in Gods vineyard.
The Massachusetts Bay enterprise was singularly blessed.
The well-equipped expedition of 1630, with eleven vessels carrying nearly a thousand immigrants, started the colony off on a larger scale than any of the other English settlements.
Continuing turmoil in England tossed up additional  enriching waves of Puritans on the shores of Massachusetts in the following decade (see Makers of America: The English, pp.
5051).
During the Great Migration of the 1630s, about seventy thousand refugees left England.
But not all of them were Puritans, and only about twenty thousand came to Massachusetts.
Many were attracted to the warm and fertile West Indies, especially the sugar-rich island of Barbados.
More Puritans came to this Caribbean islet than to all of Massachusetts.
Many fairly prosperous, educated persons immigrated to the Bay Colony, including John Winthrop, a well-to-do pillar of English society, who became the colonys first governor.
A successful attorney and manor lord in England, Winthrop eagerly accepted the offer to become governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, believing that he had a calling from God to lead the new religious experiment.
He served as governor or deputy governor for nineteen years.
The resources and skills of talented settlers like Winthrop helped Massachusetts prosper, as fur trading, fishing, and shipbuilding blossomed into important industries, especially fish and ships.
Massachusetts Bay Colony rapidly shot to the fore as both the biggest and the most influential of the New England outposts.
Massachusetts also benefited from a shared sense of purpose among most of the first settlers.
C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 The Great English Migration, c.
16301642  Much of the early history of the United States was written by New Englanders, who were not disposed to emphasize the larger exodus of English migrants to the Caribbean islands.
When the mainland colonists declared independence in 1776, they hoped that these island outposts would join them, but the existence of the British navy had a dissuading effect.
We shall be as a city upon a hill, a beacon to humanity, declared Governor Winthrop.
The Puritan bay colonists believed that they had a covenant with God, an agreement to build a holy society that would be a model for humankind.
These common convictions deeply shaped the infant colonys life.
Soon after the colonists arrival, the franchise was extended to all freemenadult males who belonged to the Puritan congregations, which in time came to be called collectively  the Congregational Church.
Unchurched men remained voteless in provincial elections, as did women.
On this basis about two-fifths of adult males enjoyed the franchise in provincial affairs, a far larger proportion than in contemporary England.
Town governments, which conducted much important business, were even more inclusive.
There all male property holders, and in some cases other residents as well, enjoyed the priceless boon of publicly discussing local issues, often with much heat, and of voting on them by a majority-rule show of hands.
Yet the provincial government, liberal by the standards of the time, was not a democracy.
The able Governor Winthrop feared and distrusted the commons as the meaner sort and thought that democracy was the meanest and worst of all forms of government.
If the people be governors, asked one Puritan clergyman, who shall be governed?
True, the freemen annually elected the governor and his assistants, as well as a representative assembly called the General Court.
But only Puritansthe visible saints who alone were eligible for church membershipcould be freemen.
And according to the doctrine of the covenant, the whole purpose of government was to enforce Gods lawswhich applied to believers and nonbelievers alike.
Moreover, nonbelievers as well as believers paid taxes for the government-supported church.
Religious leaders thus wielded enormous influence in the Massachusetts Bible Commonwealth.
They powerfully influenced admission to church membership by conducting public interrogations of persons claiming to have experienced conversion.
Prominent among the early clergy was fiery John Cotton.
Educated at Englands Cambridge University, a Puritan citadel, he emigrated to Massachusetts to avoid persecution for his criticism of the Church of England.
In the Bay Colony he devoted his considerable learning to defending the governments duty to enforce religious rules.
Profoundly pious, he sometimes preached and prayed up to six hours in a single day.
But the power of the preachers was not absolute.
A congregation had the right to hire and fire its minister and to set his salary.
Clergymen were also barred from holding formal political office.
Puritans in England had suffered too much at the hands of a political Anglican clergy to permit in the New World another unholy union of religious and government power.
In a limited way, the bay colonists thus endorsed the idea of the separation of church and state.
The Puritans were a worldly lot, despiteor even because oftheir spiritual intensity.
Like John Winthrop, they believed in the doctrine of a calling to do Gods work on earth.
They shared in what was later called the Protestant ethic, which involved serious commitment to work and to engagement in worldly pursuits.
Legend to the contrary, they also enjoyed simple pleasures: they ate plentifully, drank heartily, sang songs occasionally, and made love monogamously.
Like other peoples of their time in both America and Europe, they passed laws aimed at making sure these pleasures stayed simple by repressing certain human instincts.
In New Haven, for example, a young married couple was fined twenty shillings for the crime of kissing in public, and in later years Connecticut came to be dubbed the Blue Law State.
(It was so named for the blue paper on which the repressive lawsalso known as sumptuary lawswere printed.
) Yet life was serious business, and hellfire was reala hell where sinners shriveled and shrieked in vain for divine mercy.
An immensely popular poem in New England, selling one copy for every twenty people, was clergyman Michael Wigglesworths  Day of Doom (1662).
Especially horrifying were his descriptions of the fate of the damned: The Bay Colony enjoyed a high degree of social harmony, stemming from common beliefs, in its early years.
But even in this tightly knit community, dissension soon appeared.
Quakers, who flouted the authority of the Puritan clergy, were persecuted with fines, floggings, and banishment.
In one extreme case, four Quakers who defied expulsion, one of them a woman, were hanged on the Boston Common.
A sharp challenge to Puritan orthodoxy came from Anne Hutchinson.
She was an exceptionally intelligent, strong-willed, and talkative woman, ultimately the mother of fourteen children.
Swift and sharp in theological argument, she carried to logical extremes the Puritan doctrine of predestination.
She claimed that a holy life was no sure sign of salvation and that the truly saved need not bother to obey the law of either God or man.
This assertion, known as  the law), was high heresy.
Brought to trial in 1638, the quick-witted Hutchinson bamboozled her clerical inquisitors for days, until she eventually boasted that she had come by her beliefs through a direct revelation from God.
This was even higher heresy.
The Puritan magistrates had little choice but to banish her, lest she pollute the entire Puritan experiment.
With her family, she set out on foot for Rhode Island, though pregnant.
She finally moved to New York, where she and all but one of her household were killed by Indians.
Back in the Bay Colony, the pious John Winthrop saw Gods hand in her fate.
More threatening to the Puritan leaders was a personable and popular Salem minister, Roger Williams.
Williams was a young man with radical ideas and an unrestrained tongue.
An extreme Separatist, he hounded his fellow clergymen to make a clean break with the corrupt Church of England.
He also challenged the legality of the Bay Colonys charter, which he condemned for expropriating the land from the Indians without fair compensation.
As if all this were not enough, he went on to deny the authority of civil government to regulate religious behaviora seditious blow at the Puritan idea of governments very purpose.
Their patience exhausted by 1635, the Bay Colony authorities found Williams guilty of disseminating newe & dangerous opinions and ordered him banished.
He was permitted to remain several months longer because of illness, but he kept up his criticisms.
The outraged magistrates, fearing that he might organize a rival colony of malcontents, made plans to exile him to England.
But Williams foiled them.
Aided by friendly Indians, Roger Williams fled to the Rhode Island area in 1636, in the midst of a bitter winter.
At Providence the courageous and farvisioned Williams built a Baptist church, probably the first in America.
He established complete freedom of religion, even for Jews and Catholics.
He demanded C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 no oaths regarding religious beliefs, no compulsory attendance at worship, no taxes to support a state church.
He even sheltered the abused Quakers, although disagreeing sharply with their views.
Williamss endorsement of religious tolerance made Rhode Island more liberal than any of the other English settlements in the New World, and more advanced than most Old World communities as well.
Those outcasts who clustered about Roger Williams enjoyed additional blessings.
They exercised simple manhood suffrage from the start, though this broad-minded practice was later narrowed by a property qualification.
Opposed to special privilege of any sort, the doughty Rhode Islanders managed to achieve remarkable freedom of opportunity.
Other scattered settlements soon dotted Rhode Island.
They consisted largely of malcontents and exiles, some of whom could not bear the stifling theological atmosphere of the Bay Colony.
Many of these restless souls in Rogues Island, including Anne Hutchinson, had little in common with Roger Williamsexcept being unwelcome anywhere else.
The Puritan clergy back in Boston sneered at Rhode Island as that sewer in which the Lords debris had collected and rotted.
Planted by dissenters and exiles, Rhode Island became strongly individualistic and stubbornly independent.
With good reason Little Rhody was later known as the traditional home of the otherwise minded.
Begun as a squatter colony in 1636 without legal standing, it finally established rights to the soil when it secured a charter from Parliament in 1644.
A huge bronze statue of the Independent Man appropriately stands today on the dome of the statehouse in Providence.
The smiling valley of the Connecticut River, one of the few highly fertile expanses of any size in all New England, had meanwhile attracted a sprinkling of Dutch and English settlers.
Hartford was founded in 1635.
The next year witnessed a spectacular beginning of the centuries-long westward movement across the continent.
An energetic group of Boston Puritans, led by the Reverend Thomas Hooker, swarmed as a body into the Hartford area, with the ailing Mrs.
Hooker carried on a horse litter.
Three years later, in 1639, the settlers of the new Connecticut River colony drafted in open meeting a trailblazing document known as the Fundamental Orders.
It was in effect a modern constitution, which established a regime democratically controlled by the substantial citizens.
Essential features of the Fundamental Orders were later borrowed by Connecticut for its colonial charter and ultimately for its state constitution.
Another flourishing Connecticut settlement began to spring up at New Haven in 1638.
It  was a prosperous community, founded by Puritans who contrived to set up an even closer churchgovernment alliance than in Massachusetts.
Although only squatters without a charter, the colonists dreamed of making New Haven a bustling seaport.
But they fell into disfavor with Charles II as a result of having sheltered two of the judges who had condemned his father, Charles I, to death.
In 1662, to the acute distress of the New Havenites, the crown granted a charter to Connecticut that merged New Haven with the more democratic settlements in the Connecticut Valley.
16 4 1 16 79 16 77 16 91 Portsmouth Salem Cambridge Boston Plymouth (Pilgrims) Providence Portsmouth New Haven Springfield Hartford MAINE 1623 NEW HAMPSHIRE CONNECTICUT 1635-1636 NEW HAVEN 1638 PLYMOUTH 1620 MASSACHUSETTS               BAY             1630 RHODE ISLAND 1636 Seventeenth-Century New England Settlements  The Massachusetts Bay Colony was the hub of New England.
All earlier colonies grew into it; all later colonies grew out of it.
uring the late Middle Ages, the Black Death and other epidemics that ravaged England kept the islands population in check.
But by 1500 increased resistance to such diseases allowed the population to soar, and a century later the island nation was bursting at the seams.
This population explosion, combined with economic depression and religious repression, sparked the first major European migration to Englands New World colonies.
Some of those who voyaged to Virginia and Maryland in the seventeenth century were independent artisans or younger members of English gentry families.
But roughly three-quarters of the English migrants to the Chesapeake during this period came as servants, signed to indentures ranging from four to seven years.
One English observer described such indentured servants as idle, lazie, simple people, and another complained that many of those taking ship for the colonies have been pursued by hue-and-cry for robberies, burglaries, or breaking prison.
In fact, most indentured servants were young men drawn from Englands middling classes.
Some fled the disastrous slump in the cloth trade in the early seventeenth century.
Many others had been forced off the land as the dawning national economy prompted landowners in southwestern England to convert from crop fields to pasture and to enclose the land for sheep grazing.
Making their way from town to town in search of work, they eventually drifted into port cities such as Bristol and London.
There they boarded ship for America, where they provided the labor necessary to cultivate the Chesapeakes staple crop, tobacco.
Some 40 percent of these immigrants of the mid-seventeenth century died before they finished their terms of indenture.
(Because of the high death rate and the shortage of women, Chesapeake society was unable to reproduce itself naturally until the last quarter of the seventeenth century.
) The survivors entered Chesapeake society with only their freedom duesusually clothing, an ax and hoe, and a few barrels of corn.
Nevertheless, many of those who arrived early in the century eventually acquired land and moved into the mainstream of Chesapeake society.
After 1660, however, opportunities for the freemen declined.
In England the population spurt ended, and the great London fire of 1666 sparked a building boom that soaked up job seekers.
As the supply of English indentured servants dried up in the late  seventeenth century, southern planters looking for laborers turned increasingly to black slaves.
Whereas English immigration to the Chesapeake was spread over nearly a century, most English voyagers to New England arrived within a single decade.
In the twelve years between 1629 and 1642, some twenty thousand Puritans swarmed to the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Fleeing a sustained economic depression and the cruel religious repression of Charles I, the Puritans came to plant a godly commonwealth in New Englands rocky soil.
In contrast to the single indentured servants  of the Chesapeake, the New England Puritans migrated in family groups, and in many cases whole communities were transplanted from England to America.
Although they remained united by the common language and common Puritan faith they carried to New England, their English baggage was by no means uniform.
As in England, most New England settlements were farming communities.
But some New England towns re-created the specialized economies of particular localities in England.
Marblehead, Massachusetts, for example, became a fishing village because most of its settlers had been fishermen in Old England.
The townsfolk of Rowley, Massachusetts, brought from Yorkshire in northern England not only their town name but also their distinctive way of life, revolving around textile manufacturing.
Political practices, too, reflected the towns variegated English roots.
In Ipswich, Massachusetts, settled by East Anglian Puritans, the ruling selectmen served long terms and ruled with an iron hand.
By contrast, local politics in the town of Newbury were bitter and contentious, and officeholders were hard pressed to win reelection; the towns founders came from western England, a region with little tradition of local government.
Although the Puritans imperial masters in London eventually circumscribed such precious local autonomy, this diverse heritage of fiercely independent New England towns endured, reasserting itself during the American Revolution.
Land Use in Rowley, Massachusetts, c.
1650  The settlers of Rowley brought from their native Yorkshire the practice of granting families very small farming plots and reserving large common fields for use by the entire community.
On the map, the yellow areas show private land; the green areas show land held in common.
Far to the north, enterprising fishermen and fur traders had been active on the coast of Maine for a dozen or so years before the founding of Plymouth.
After disheartening attempts at colonization in 1623 by Sir Ferdinando Gorges, this land of lakes and forests was absorbed by Massachusetts Bay after a formal purchase in 1677 from the Gorges heirs.
It remained a part of Massachusetts for nearly a century and a half before becoming a separate state.
Granite-ribbed New Hampshire also sprang from the fishing and trading activities along its narrow coast.
It was absorbed in 1641 by the grasping Bay Colony, under a strained interpretation of the Massachusetts charter.
The king, annoyed by this display of greed, arbitrarily separated New Hampshire from Massachusetts in 1679 and made it a royal colony.
The spread of English settlements inevitably led to clashes with the Indians, who were particularly weak in New England.
Shortly before the Pilgrims had arrived at Plymouth in 1620, an epidemic, probably triggered by contact with English fishermen, had swept through the coastal tribes and killed more than three-quarters of the native people.
Deserted Indian fields, ready for tillage, greeted the Plymouth settlers and scattered skulls and bones provided grim evidence of the impact of the disease.
In no position to resist the English incursion, the local Wampanoag Indians at first befriended the settlers.
Cultural accommodation was facilitated by Squanto, a Wampanoag who had learned English from a ships captain who had kidnapped him some years earlier.
The Wampanoag chieftain Massasoit signed a treaty with the Plymouth Pilgrims in 1621 and helped them celebrate the first Thanksgiving after the autumn harvests that same year.
As more English settlers arrived and pushed inland into the Connecticut River valley, confrontations between Indians and whites ruptured these peaceful relations.
Hostilities exploded in 1637 between the English settlers and the powerful Pequot tribe.
Besieging a Pequot village on Connecticuts Mystic River, English militiamen and their Narragansett Indian allies set fire to the Indian wigwams and shot the fleeing survivors.
The slaughter wrote a brutal finish to the Pequot War, virtually annihilated the Pequot tribe, and inaugurated four decades of uneasy peace between Puritans and Indians.
Lashed by critics in England, the Puritans made some feeble efforts at converting the remaining Indians to Christianity, although Puritan missionary zeal never equaled that of the Catholic Spanish and French.
A mere handful of Indians were gathered into Puritan praying towns to make the acquaintance of the English God and to learn the ways of English culture.
The Indians only hope for resisting English encroachment lay in intertribal unitya pan-Indian alliance against the swiftly spreading English settleC HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 ments.
In 1675 Massasoits son, Metacom, called King Philip by the English, forged such an alliance and mounted a series of coordinated assaults on English villages throughout New England.
Frontier settlements were especially hard hit, and refugees fell back toward the relative safety of Boston.
When the war ended in 1676, fifty-two Puritan towns had been attacked, and twelve destroyed entirely.
Hundreds of colonists and many more Indians lay dead.
Metacoms wife and son were sold into slavery; he himself was captured, beheaded, and drawn and quartered.
His head was carried on a pike back to Plymouth, where it was mounted on grisly display for years.
King Philips War slowed the westward march of English settlement in New England for several decades.
But the war inflicted a lasting defeat on New Englands Indians.
Drastically reduced in numbers, dispirited, and disbanded, they thereafter posed only sporadic threats to the New England colonists.
A path-breaking experiment in union was launched in 1643, when four colonies banded together to form the New England Confederation.
Old England was then deeply involved in civil wars, and hence the colonists were thrown upon their own resources.
The primary purpose of the confederation was defense against foes or potential foes, notably the Indians, the French, and the Dutch.
Purely intercolonial problems, such as runaway servants and criminals who had fled from one colony to another, also came within the jurisdiction of the confederation.
Each member colony, regardless of size, wielded two votesan arrangement highly displeasing to the most populous colony, Massachusetts Bay.
The confederation was essentially an exclusive Puritan club.
It consisted of the two Massachusetts colonies (the Bay Colony and bantam-sized Plymouth) and the two Connecticut colonies (New Haven and the scattered valley settlements).
The Puritan leaders blackballed Rhode Island as well as the Maine outposts.
These places, it was charged, harbored too many heretical or otherwise undesirable characters.
Shockingly, one of the Maine towns had made a tailor its mayor and had even sheltered an excommunicated minister of the gospel.
Weak though it was, the confederation was the first notable milestone on the long and rocky road toward colonial unity.
The delegates took tottering but long-overdue steps toward acting together on matters of intercolonial importance.
Rank-and-file colonists, for their part, received valuable experience in delegating their votes to properly chosen representatives.
Back in England the king had paid little attention to the American colonies during the early years of their planting.
They were allowed, in effect, to become semiautonomous commonwealths.
This era of benign neglect was prolonged when the crown, struggling to retain its power, became enmeshed during the 1640s in civil wars with the parliamentarians.
But when Charles II was restored to the English throne in 1660, the royalists and their Church of England allies were once more firmly in the saddle.
Puritan hopes of eventually purifying the old James I, 16031625 Va., Plymouth founded; Separatists persecuted Charles I, 16251649 Civil wars, 16421649; Mass., Md.
founded (Interregnum, 16491660) Commonwealth; Protectorate (Oliver Cromwell) Charles II, 16601685 The Restoration; Carolinas, Pa., N.Y.
founded; Conn.
chartered James II, 16851688 Catholic trend; Glorious Revolution, 1688 William & Mary, 16891702 King Williams War, 16891697 (Mary died 1694) *See p.
29 for predecessors; p.
110 for successors.
English church withered.
Worse, Charles II was determined to take an active, aggressive hand in the management of the colonies.
His plans ran headlong against the habits that decades of relative independence had bred in the colonists.
Deepening colonial defiance was nowhere more glaringly revealed than in Massachusetts.
One of the kings agents in Boston was mortified to find that royal orders had no more effect than old issues of the London  coming.
As a slap at Massachusetts, Charles II gave rival Connecticut in 1662 a sea-to-sea charter grant, which legalized the squatter settlements.
The very next year the outcasts in Rhode Island received a new charter, which gave kingly sanction to the most religiously tolerant government yet devised in America.
A final and crushing blow fell on the stiffnecked Bay Colony in 1684, when its precious charter was revoked by the London authorities.
Massachusetts suffered further humiliation in 1686, when the Dominion of New England was created by royal authority.
Unlike the homegrown New England Confederation, it was imposed from London.
Embracing at first all New England, it was expanded two years later to include New York and East and West Jersey.
The dominion also aimed at bolstering C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 colonial defense in the event of war with the Indians and hence, from the imperial viewpoint of Parliament, was a statesmanlike move.
More importantly, the Dominion of New England was designed to promote urgently needed efficiency in the administration of the English Navigation Laws.
Those laws reflected the intensifying colonial rivalries of the seventeenth century.
They sought to stitch Englands overseas possessions more tightly to the motherland by throttling American trade with countries not ruled by the English crown.
Like colonial peoples everywhere, the Americans chafed at such confinements, and smuggling became an increasingly common and honorable occupation.
At the head of the new dominion stood autocratic Sir Edmund Andros, an able English military man, conscientious but tactless.
Establishing headquarters in Puritanical Boston, he generated much hostility by his open affiliation with the despised Church of England.
The colonists were also outraged by his noisy and Sabbath-profaning soldiers, who were accused of teaching the people to drink, blaspheme, curse, and damn.
Andros was prompt to use the mailed fist.
He ruthlessly curbed the cherished town meetings; laid heavy restrictions on the courts, the press, and the schools; and revoked all land titles.
Dispensing with the popular assemblies, he taxed the people without the consent of their duly elected representatives.
He also strove to enforce the unpopular Navigation Laws and suppress smuggling.
Liberty-loving colonists, accustomed to unusual privileges during long decades of neglect, were goaded to the verge of revolt.
The people of old England, likewise resisting oppression, stole a march on the people of New England.
In 16881689 they engineered the memorable Glorious (or Bloodless) Revolution.
Dethroning the despotic and unpopular Catholic James II, they enthroned the Protestant rulers of the Netherlands, the Dutch-born William III and his English wife, Mary, daughter of James II.
When the news of the Glorious Revolution reached America, the ramshackle Dominion of New England collapsed like a house of cards.
A Boston mob, catching the fever, rose against the existing regime.
Sir Edmund Andros attempted to flee in womans clothing but was betrayed by boots protruding beneath his dress.
He was hastily shipped off to England.
Massachusetts, though rid of the despotic Andros, did not gain as much from the upheaval as it had hoped.
In 1691 it was arbitrarily made a royal colony, with a new charter and a new royal governor.
The permanent loss of the ancient charter was a staggering blow to the proud Puritans, who never fully recovered.
Worst of all, the privilege of voting, once a monopoly of church members, was now to be enjoyed by all qualified male property holders.
Englands Glorious Revolution reverberated throughout the colonies from New England to the Chesapeake.
Inspired by the challenge to the crown in old England, many colonists seized the occasion to strike against royal authority in America.
Unrest rocked both New York and Maryland from 1689 to 1691, until newly appointed royal governors restored a semblance of order.
Most importantly, the new monarchs relaxed the royal grip on colonial trade, inaugurating a period of salutary neglect when the much-resented Navigation Laws were only weakly enforced.
Yet residues remained of Charles IIs effort to assert tighter administrative control over his Early Settlements in the Middle Colonies, with Founding Dates empire.
More English officialsjudges, clerks, customs officialsnow staffed the courts and strolled the wharves of English America.
Many were incompetent, corrupt hacks who knew little and cared less about American affairs.
Appointed by influential patrons in far-off England, by their very presence they blocked the rise of local leaders to positions of political power.
Aggrieved Americans viewed them with mounting contempt and resentment as the eighteenth century wore on.
Late in the sixteenth century, the oppressed people of the Netherlands unfurled the standard of rebellion against Catholic Spain.
After bloody and  protracted fighting, they finally succeeded, with  the aid of Protestant England, in winning their independence.
The seventeenth centurythe era of Rembrandt and other famous artistswas a golden age in Dutch history.
This vigorous little lowland nation finally emerged as a major commercial and naval power, and then it ungratefully challenged the supremacy of its former benefactor, England.
Three great Anglo-Dutch naval wars were fought in the seventeenth century, with as many as a hundred ships on each side.
The sturdy Dutch dealt blows about as heavy as they received.
The Dutch Republic also became a leading colonial power, with by far its greatest activity in the East Indies.
There it maintained an enormous and profitable empire for over three hundred years.
The Dutch East India Company was virtually a state within a state and at one time supported an army of 10,000 men and a fleet of 190 ships, 40 of them menof-war.
Seeking greater riches, this enterprising company employed an English explorer, Henry Hudson.
Disregarding orders to sail northeast, he ventured into Delaware Bay and New York Bay in 1609 and then ascended the Hudson River, hoping that at last he had chanced upon the coveted shortcut through the continent.
But, as the event proved, he merely filed a Dutch claim to a magnificently wooded and watered area.
Much less powerful than the mighty Dutch East India Company was the Dutch West India Company, which maintained profitable enterprises in the Caribbean.
At times it was less interested in trading C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 than in raiding and at one fell swoop in 1628 captured a fleet of Spanish treasure ships laden with loot worth $15 million.
The company also established outposts in Africa and a thriving sugar industry in Brazil, which for several decades was its principal center of activity in the New World.
New Netherland, in the beautiful Hudson River area, was planted in 16231624 on a permanent basis.
Established by the Dutch West India Company for its quick-profit fur trade, it was never more than a secondary interest of the founders.
The companys most brilliant stroke was to buy Manhattan Island from the Indians (who did not actually own it) for virtually worthless trinketstwenty-two thousand acres of what is now perhaps the most valuable real estate in the world for pennies per acre.
New Amsterdamlater New York Citywas a company town.
It was run by and for the Dutch company, in the interests of the stockholders.
The investors had no enthusiasm for religious toleration, free speech, or democratic practices; and the governors appointed by the company as directorsgeneral were usually harsh and despotic.
Religious dissenters who opposed the official Dutch Reformed Church were regarded with suspicion, and for a while Quakers were savagely abused.
In response to repeated protests by the aggravated colonists, a local body with limited lawmaking power was finally established.
This picturesque Dutch colony took on a strongly aristocratic tinge and retained it for generations.
Vast feudal estates fronting the Hudson River, known as patroonships, were granted to promoters who agreed to settle fifty people on them.
One patroonship in the Albany area was slightly larger than the later state of Rhode Island.
Colorful little New Amsterdam attracted a cosmopolitan population, as is common in seaport towns.
A French Jesuit missionary, visiting in the 1640s, noted that eighteen different languages were being spoken in the streets.
New Yorks later babel of immigrant tongues was thus foreshadowed.
Vexations beset the Dutch company-colony from the beginning.
The directors-general were largely incompetent.
Company shareholders demanded their dividends, even at the expense of the colonys welfare.
The Indians, infuriated by Dutch cruelties, retaliated with horrible massacres.
As a defense measure, the hard-pressed settlers on Manhattan Island erected a stout wall, from which Wall Street derives its name.
New England was hostile to the growth of its Dutch neighbor, and the people of Connecticut finally ejected intruding Hollanders from their verdant valley.
Three of the four member colonies of the New England Confederation were eager to wipe out New Netherland with military force.
But Massachusetts, which would have had to provide most of the troops, vetoed the proposed foray.
The Swedes in turn trespassed on Dutch preserves, from 1638 to 1655, by planting the anemic colony of New Sweden on the Delaware River.
This was the golden age of Sweden, during and following the Thirty Years War of 16181648, in which its brilliant King Gustavus Adolphus had carried the torch for Protestantism.
This outburst of energy in Sweden caused it to enter the costly colonial game in America, though on something of a shoestring.
Resenting the Swedish intrusion on the Delaware, the Dutch dispatched a small military expedition in 1655.
It was led by the ablest of the directors-general, Peter Stuyvesant, who had lost a leg while soldiering in the West Indies and was dubbed Father Wooden Leg by the Indians.
The main fort fell after a bloodless siege, whereupon Swedish rule came to an abrupt end.
The colonists were absorbed by New Netherland.
New Sweden, never important, soon faded away, leaving behind in later Delaware a sprinkling of Swedish place names and Swedish log cabins (the first in America), as well as an admixture of Swedish blood.
Lacking vitality, and representing only a secondary commercial interest of the Dutch, New Netherland lay under the menacing shadow of the vigorous English colonies to the north.
In addition, it was honeycombed with New England immigrants.
Numbering about one-half of New Netherlands ten thousand souls in 1664, they might in time have seized control from within.
The days of the Dutch on the Hudson were numbered, for the English regarded them as intruders.
In 1664, after the imperially ambitious Charles II had granted the area to his brother, the Duke of York, a strong English squadron appeared off the decrepit defenses of New Amsterdam.
A fuming Peter Stuyvesant, short of all munitions except courage, was forced to surrender without firing a shot.
New Amsterdam was thereupon renamed New York, in honor of the Duke of York.
England won a splendid harbor, strategically located in the middle of the mainland colonies, and a stately Hudson River penetrating the interior.
With the removal of this foreign wedge, the English banner now waved triumphantly over a solid stretch of territory from Maine to the Carolinas.
C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 The conquered Dutch province tenaciously retained many of the illiberal features of earlier days.
An autocratic spirit survived, and the aristocratic element gained strength when certain corrupt English governors granted immense acreage to their favorites.
Influential landowning familiessuch as the Livingstons and the De Lanceyswielded disproportionate power in the affairs of colonial New York.
These monopolistic land policies, combined with the lordly atmosphere, discouraged many European immigrants from coming.
The physical growth of New York was correspondingly retarded.
The Dutch peppered place names over the land, including Harlem (Haarlem), Brooklyn (Breuckelen), and Hell Gate (Hellegat).
They likewise left their imprint on the gambrel-roofed architecture.
As for social customs and folkways, no other foreign group of comparable size has made so colorful a contribution.
Noteworthy were Easter eggs, Santa Claus, waffles, sauerkraut, bowling, sleighing, skating, and kolf (golf )a dangerous game played with heavy clubs and forbidden in settled areas.
A remarkable group of dissenters, commonly known as Quakers, arose in England during the mid-1600s.
Their name derived from the report that they quaked when under deep religious emotion.
Officially they were known as the Religious Society of Friends.
Quakers were especially offensive to the authorities, both religious and civil.
They refused to support the established Church of England with taxes.
They built simple meetinghouses, congregated without a paid clergy, and spoke up themselves in meetings when moved.
Believing that they were all children in the sight of God, they kept their broadbrimmed hats on in the presence of their betters and addressed others with simple thees and thous, rather than with conventional titles.
They would take no oaths because Jesus had commanded, Swear not at all.
This peculiarity often embroiled them with government officials, for test oaths were still required to establish the fact that a person was not a Roman Catholic.
The Quakers, beyond a doubt, were a people of deep conviction.
They abhorred strife and warfare and refused military service.
As advocates of passive resistance, they would turn the other cheek and rebuild their meetinghouse on the site where their enemies had torn it down.
Their courage and devotion to principle finally triumphed.
Although at times they seemed stubborn and unreasonable, they were a simple, devoted, democratic people, contending in their own high-minded way for religious and civic freedom.
William Penn, a wellborn and athletic young Englishman, was attracted to the Quaker faith in 1660, when only sixteen years old.
His father, disapproving, administered a sound flogging.
After various adventures in the army (the best portrait of the peaceful Quaker has him in armor), the youth firmly embraced the despised faith and suffered much persecution.
The courts branded him a saucy and impertinent fellow.
Several hundred of his less fortunate fellow Quakers died of cruel treatment, and thousands more were fined, flogged, or cast into dank prisons.
Penns thoughts naturally turned to the New World, where a sprinkling of Quakers had already fled, notably to Rhode Island, North Carolina, and New Jersey.
Eager to establish an asylum for his people, he also hoped to experiment with liberal ideas in government and at the same time make a profit.
Finally, in 1681, he managed to secure from the king an immense grant of fertile land, in consideration of a monetary debt owed to his deceased father by the crown.
The king called the area Pennsylvania (Penns Woodland) in honor of the sire.
The modest son, fearing that critics would accuse him of naming it after himself, sought unsuccessfully to change the name.
Pennsylvania was by far the best advertised of all the colonies.
Its founderthe first American advertising mansent out paid agents and distributed countless pamphlets printed in English, Dutch, French, and German.
Unlike the lures of many other American real estate promoters, then and later, Penns inducements were generally truthful.
He especially welcomed forward-looking spirits and substantial citizens, including industrious carC HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 penters, masons, shoemakers, and other manual workers.
His liberal land policy, which encouraged substantial holdings, was instrumental in attracting a heavy inflow of immigrants.
Penn formally launched his colony in 1681.
His task was simplified by the presence of several thousand squattersDutch, Swedish, English, Welshwho were already scattered along the banks of the Delaware River.
Philadelphia, meaning brotherly love in Greek, was more carefully planned than most colonial cities and consequently enjoyed wide and attractive streets.
Penn farsightedly bought land from the Indians, including Chief Tammany, later patron saint of New Yorks political Tammany Hall.
His treatment of the native peoples was so fair that the Quaker broad brims went among them unarmed and even employed them as baby-sitters.
For a brief period, Pennsylvania seemed the promised land of amicable Indian-white relations.
Some southern tribes even migrated to Pennsylvania, seeking the Quaker haven.
But ironically, Quaker tolerance proved the undoing of Quaker Indian policy.
As non-Quaker European immigrants flooded into the province, they undermined the Quakers own benevolent policy toward the Indians.
The feisty Scots-Irish were particularly unpersuaded by Quaker idealism.
Penns new proprietary regime was unusually liberal and included a representative assembly elected by the landowners.
No tax-supported state church drained coffers or demanded allegiance.
Freedom of worship was guaranteed to all residents, although Penn, under pressure from London, was forced to deny Catholics and Jews the privilege of voting or holding office.
The death penalty was imposed only for treason and murder, as compared with some two hundred capital crimes in England.
Among other noteworthy features, no provision was made by the peace-loving Quakers of Pennsylvania for a military defense.
No restrictions were placed on immigration, and naturalization was made easy.
The humane Quakers early developed a strong dislike of black slavery, and in the genial glow of Pennsylvania some progress was made toward social reform.
With its many liberal features, Pennsylvania attracted a rich mix of ethnic groups.
They included numerous religious misfits who were repelled by the harsh practices of neighboring colonies.
This Quaker refuge boasted a surprisingly modern atmosphere in an unmodern age and to an unusual degree afforded economic opportunity, civil liberty, and religious freedom.
Even so, blue laws prohibited ungodly revelers, stage plays, playing cards, dice, games, and excessive hilarity.
Under such generally happy auspices, Penns brainchild grew lustily.
The Quakers were shrewd businesspeople, and in a short time the settlers were exporting grain and other foodstuffs.
Within two years Philadelphia claimed three hundred houses and twenty-five hundred people.
Within nineteen yearsby 1700the colony was surpassed in population and wealth only by long-established Virginia and Massachusetts.
William Penn, who altogether spent about four years in Pennsylvania, was never fully appreciated by his colonists.
His governors, some of them incompetent and tactless, quarreled bitterly with the people, who were constantly demanding greater political control.
Penn himself became too friendly with James II, the deposed Catholic king.
Thrice arrested for treason, thrust for a time into a debtors prison, and afflicted by a paralytic stroke, he died full of sorrows.
His enduring monument was not only a noble experiment in government but also a new commonwealth.
Based on civil and religious liberty, and dedicated to freedom of conscience and worship, it held aloft a hopeful torch in a world of semidarkness.
Small Quaker settlements flourished next door to Pennsylvania.
New Jersey was started in 1664, when two noble proprietors received the area from The sect of the Quakers in their best representatives appear to me to have come nearer to the sublime history and genius of Christ than any other of the sects.
the Duke of York.
A substantial number of New Englanders, including many whose weary soil had petered out, flocked to the new colony.
One of the proprietors sold West New Jersey in 1674 to a group of Quakers, who here set up a sanctuary even before Pennsylvania was launched.
East New Jersey was also acquired in later years by the Quakers, whose wings were clipped in 1702 when the crown combined the two Jerseys in a royal colony.
Swedish-tinged Delaware consisted of only three countiestwo at high tide, the witticism goesand was named after Lord De La Warr, the harsh military governor who had arrived in Virginia in 1610.
Harboring some Quakers, and closely associated with Penns prosperous colony, Delaware was granted its own assembly in 1703.
But until the American Revolution, it remained under the governor of Pennsylvania.
The middle coloniesNew York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvaniaenjoyed certain features in common.
In general, the soil was fertile and the expanse of land was broad, unlike rock-bestrewn New England.
Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey came to be known as the bread colonies, by virtue of their heavy exports of grain.
Rivers also played a vital role.
Broad, languid streamsnotably the Susquehanna, the Delaware, and the Hudsontapped the fur trade of the interior and beckoned adventuresome spirits into the backcountry.
The rivers had few cascading waterfalls, unlike New Englands, and hence presented little inducement to milling or manufacturing with water-wheel power.
A surprising amount of industry nonetheless hummed in the middle colonies.
Virginal forests abounded for lumbering and shipbuilding.
The presence of deep river estuaries and landlocked harbors stimulated both commerce and the growth of seaports, such as New York and Philadelphia.
Even Albany, more than a hundred miles up the Hudson, was a port of some consequence in colonial days.
The middle colonies were in many respects midway between New England and the southern plantation group.
Except in aristocratic New York, the landholdings were generally intermediate in sizesmaller than in the big-acreage South but larger than in small-farm New England.
Local  government lay somewhere between the personalized town meeting of New England and the diffused county government of the South.
There were fewer industries in the middle colonies than in New England, more than in the South.
Yet the middle colonies, which in some ways were the most American part of America, could claim certain distinctions in their own right.
Generally speaking, the population was more ethnically mixed than that of other settlements.
The people were blessed with an unusual degree of religious toleration and democratic control.
Earnest and devout Quakers, in particular, made a compassionate contribution to human freedom out of all proportion to their numbers.
Desirable land was more easily acquired in the middle colonies than in New England or in the tidewater South.
One result was that a considerable amount of economic and social democracy prevailed, though less so in aristocratic New York.
Modern-minded Benjamin Franklin, often regarded as  sonality of his era, was a child of the middle colonies.
Although it is true that Franklin was born a Yankee in puritanical Boston, he entered Philadelphia as a seventeen-year-old in 1720 with a loaf of bread under each arm and immediately found a congenial home in the urbane, open atmosphere of what was then North Americas biggest city.
One Pennsylvanian later boasted that Franklin came to life at seventeen, in Philadelphia.
By the time Franklin arrived in the City of Brotherly Love, the American colonies were themselves coming to life.
Population was growing robustly.
Transportation and communication were gradually improving.
The British, for the most part, continued their hands-off policies, leaving the colonists to fashion their own local governments, run their own churches, and develop networks of intercolonial trade.
As people and products crisscrossed the colonies with increasing frequency and in increasing volume, Americans began to realize thatfar removed from Mother Englandthey were not merely surviving, but truly thriving.
C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 In 1999 a boatyard worker on Cape Cod and his sister, a New Hampshire teacher, inherited a small (twenty-pound, sixteen and a half inch high) chest that had always stood on their grandmothers hall table, known in the family as the Franklin Chest.
Eager to learn more about it, they set out to discover the original owner, tracing their family genealogy and consulting with furniture experts.
In January 2000 this rare seventeenth-century cabinetry, its full provenance now known, appeared on the auction block and sold for a record $2.4 million to the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Massachusetts.
No less extraordinary than the price was the history of its creator and its owners embodied in the piece.
Salem cabinetmaker James Symonds (16361726) had made the chest for his relatives, Joseph Pope (16501712) and Bathsheba Folger (16521726), to commemorate their 1679 marriage.
Symonds carved the Popes initials and the date on the door of the cabinet.
He also put elaborate S curves on the sides remarkably similar to the Mannerist carved oak paneling produced in Norfolk, England, from where his own cabinetmaker father had emigrated.
Behind the chests door are ten drawers where the Popes would have kept jewelry, money, deeds, and writing materials.
Surely they prized the chest as a sign of refinement to be shown off in their best room, a sentiment passed down through the next thirteen generations even as the Popes identities were lost.
The chest may have become known as the Franklin Chest because Bathsheba was Benjamin Franklins aunt, but also because that identification appealed more to descendants ashamed that the Quaker Popes, whose own parents had been persecuted for their faith, were virulent accusers during the Salem witch trials of 1692.
C HAPTER 3 Settling the Northern Colonies, 16191700 Martin Luther begins Protestant Reformation John Calvin of Geneva publishes  Pilgrims sail on the  Bay Dutch found New Netherland Charles I dismisses Parliament and  persecutes Puritans Puritans found Massachusetts Bay Colony Roger Williams convicted of heresy and  founds Rhode Island colony Connecticut and New Haven colonies  founded Pequot War Anne Hutchinson banished from Massachusetts colony Connecticuts Fundamental Orders drafted English Civil War New England Confederation formed New Netherland conquers New Sweden England seizes New Netherland from Dutch East and West Jersey colonies founded King Philips War William Penn founds Pennsylvania colony Royal authority creates Dominion of New England Glorious Revolution overthrows Stuarts and  Dominion of New England he history of discovery and colonization raises perhaps the most fundamental question about all American history.
Should it be understood as the extension of European civilization into the New World or as the gradual development of a uniquely American culture?
An older school of thought tended to emphasize the Europeanization of America.
Historians of that persuasion paid close attention to the situation in Europe, particularly England and Spain, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
They also focused on the exportation of the values and institutions of the mother countries to the new lands in the western sea.
Although some historians also examined the transforming effect of America on Europe, this approach, too, remained essentially Eurocentric.
More recently, historians have concentrated on the distinctiveness of America.
The concern with European origins has evolved into a comparative treatment of European settlements in the New World.
England, Spain, Holland, and France now attract more attention for the divergent kinds of societies they fostered in America than for the way they commonly pursued Old World ambitions in the New.
The newest trend to emerge is a transatlantic history that views European empires and their American colonies as part of a process of cultural cross-fertilization affecting not only the colonies but Europe and Africa as well.
This less Eurocentric approach has also changed the way historians explain the colonial development of America.
Rather than telling the story of colonization as the imposition of  European ways of life through discovery and conquest, historians increasingly view the colonial period as one of contact and adaptation between European, African, and Native American ways of life.
Scholars including Richard White, Alfred Crosby, William Cronon, Karen Kupperman, and Timothy Silver have enhanced understanding of the cultural as well as the physical transformations that resulted from contact.
An environment of forests and meadows, for example, gave way to a landscape of fields and fences as Europeans sought to replicate the agricultural villages they had known in Europe.
Aggressive deforestation even produced climatic changes, as treeless tracts made for colder winters, hotter summers, and earth-gouging floods.
Ramon Gutierrezs  nial stage to include interactions between Spanish settlers and Native Americans in the Southwest.
The variety of American societies that emerged out of the interaction of Europeans and Native Americans has also become better appreciated.
Early histories by esteemed historians like Perry Miller exaggerated the extent to which the New England Puritan experience defined the essence of America.
Not only did these historians overlook non-English experiences, they failed to recognize the diversity in motives, methods, and consequences that existed even within English colonization.
The numbers alone tell an interesting story.
By 1700 about 220,000 English colonists had emigrated to the Caribbean, about 120,000 to the southern mainland colonies, and only about 40,000 to the middle Atlantic and New England colonies (although by the mid-eighteenth century, those headed for the latter destination would account for more than half the total).
Studies such as Richard S. Dunns   importance of the Caribbean in early English colonization efforts and make clear that the desire for economic gain, more than the quest for religious freedom, fueled the migration to the Caribbean islands.
Similarly, Edmund S. Morgans  economic ambition in explaining the English peopling of the Chesapeake and the eventual importation of African slaves to that region.
Studies by Bernard Bailyn and David Hackett Fisher demonstrate that there was scarcely a typical English migrant to the New World.
English colonists migrated both singly and in families, and for economic, social, political, and religious reasons.
Recent studies have also paid more attention to the conflicts that emerged out of this diversity in settler populations and colonial societies.
This perspective emphasizes the contests for economic and political supremacy within the colonies, such as the efforts of the Massachusetts Bay elite to ward off the challenges of religious heretics and the pressures that an increasingly restless lower class put on wealthy merchants and large landowners.
Nowhere was internal conflict so prevalent as in the ethnically diverse middle colonies, where factional antagonisms became the defining feature of public life.
The picture of colonial America that is emerging from all this new scholarship is of a society uniqueand diversefrom inception.
No longer simply Europe transplanted, American colonial society by 1700 is now viewed as an outgrowth  of many intertwining rootsof different European and African heritages, of varied encounters with native peoples and a wilderness environment, and of complicated mixtures of settler populations, each with its own distinctive set of ambitions.
For further reading, see page A2 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  American Life in the Seventeenth Century  16071692 W ILLIAM B RADFORD ,  ,  C .
1630 A s the seventeenth century wore on, the crude encampments of the first colonists slowly gave way to permanent settlements.
Durable and distinctive ways of life emerged, as Europeans and Africans adapted to the New World, and as Native Americans adapted to the newcomers.
Even the rigid doctrines of Puritanism softened somewhat in response to the circumstances of life in America.
And though all the colonies remained tied to England, and all were stitched tightly into the fabric of an Atlantic economy, regional differences continued to crystallize, notably the increasing importance of slave labor to the southern way of life.
Life in the American wilderness was nasty, brutish, and short for the earliest Chesapeake settlers.
Malaria, dysentery, and typhoid took a cruel toll, cutting ten years off the life expectancy of newcomers from England.
Half the people born in early Virginia and Maryland did not survive to celebrate their twentieth birthdays.
Few of the remaining half lived to see their fiftiethor even their fortieth, if they were women.
The disease-ravaged settlements of the Chesapeake grew only slowly in the seventeenth century, mostly through fresh immigration from England.
The great majority of immigrants were single men in their late teens and early twenties, and most perished soon after arrival.
Surviving males competed for the affections of the extremely scarce women, whom they outnumbered nearly six to one in 1650 and still outnumbered by three to two at the end of the century.
Eligible women did not remain single for long.
Families were both few and fragile in this ferocious environment.
Most men could not find mates.
Most marriages were destroyed by the death of a partner within seven years.
Scarcely any children reached adulthood under the care of two parents, and almost no one knew a grandparent.
Weak family ties were reflected in the many pregnancies among unmarried young girls.
In one Maryland county, more than a third of all brides were already pregnant when they wed.
Yet despite these hardships, the Chesapeake colonies struggled on.
The native-born inhabitants eventually acquired immunity to the killer diseases that had ravaged the original immigrants.
The presence of more women allowed more families to form, and by the end of the seventeenth century the white population of the Chesapeake was growing on the basis of its own birthrate.
As the eighteenth century opened, Virginia, with some fifty-nine thousand people, was the most populous colony.
Maryland, with about thirty thousand, was the third largest (after Massachusetts).
Although unhealthy for human life, the Chesapeake was immensely hospitable to tobacco cultivation.
Profit-hungry settlers often planted tobacco to sell before they planted corn to eat.
But intense tobacco cultivation quickly exhausted the soil, creating a nearly insatiable demand for virgin land.
Relentlessly seeking fresh fields to plant in tobacco, commercial growers plunged ever farther up the river valleys, provoking ever more Indian attacks.
Leaf-laden ships annually hauled some 1.5 million pounds of tobacco out of Chesapeake Bay by the 1630s and almost 40 million pounds a year by the end of the century.
This enormous production depressed prices, but colonial Chesapeake tobacco growers responded to falling prices in the familiar way of farmers: by planting still more acres to tobacco and bringing still more product to market.
More tobacco meant more labor, but where was it to come from?
Families procreated too slowly to provide it by natural population increase.
Indians died too quickly on contact with whites to be a reliable labor force.
African slaves cost too much money.
But England still had a surplus of displaced farmers, desperate for employment.
Many of them, as indentured servants, voluntarily mortgaged the sweat of their bodies for several years to Chesapeake masters.
In exchange they received transatlantic passage and eventual freedom dues, including a few barrels of corn, a suit of clothes, and perhaps a small parcel of land.
Both Virginia and Maryland employed the headright system to encourage the importation of servant workers.
Under its terms, whoever paid the passage of a laborer received the right to acquire fifty acres of land.
Mastersnot the servants themselvesthus reaped the benefits of landownership from the headright system.
Some masters, men who already had at least modest financial means, soon I found the plantations generally seated upon mere salt marshes full of infectious bogs and muddy creeks and lakes, and thereby subjected to all those inconveniences and diseases which are so commonly found in the most unsound and most unhealthy parts of England.
parlayed their investments in servants into vast holdings in real estate.
They became the great merchant-planters, lords of sprawling riverfront estates that came to dominate the agriculture and commerce of the southern colonies.
Ravenous for both labor and land, Chesapeake planters brought some 100,000 indentured servants to the region by 1700.
These white slaves represented more than threequarters of all European immigrants to Virginia and Maryland in the seventeenth century.
Indentured servants led a hard but hopeful life in the early days of the Chesapeake settlements.
They looked forward to becoming free and acquiring land of their own after completing their term of servitude.
But as prime land became scarcer, masters became increasingly resistant to including land grants in freedom dues.
The servants lot grew harsher as the seventeenth century wore on.
Misbehaving servants, such as a housemaid who became pregnant or a laborer who killed a hog, might be punished with an extended term of service.
Even after formal freedom was granted, penniless freed workers often had little choice but to hire themselves out for pitifully low wages to their former masters.
An accumulating mass of footloose, impoverished freemen was drifting discontentedly about the Chesapeake region by the late seventeenth century.
Mostly single young men, they were frustrated by their broken hopes of acquiring land, as well as by their gnawing failure to find single women to marry.
The swelling numbers of these wretched bachelors rattled the established planters.
The Virginia assembly in 1670 disfranchised most of the landless knockabouts, accusing them of having little interest in the country and causing tumults at the election to the disturbance of his majestys peace.
Virginias Governor William Berkeley lamented his lot as ruler of this rabble: How miserable that man is that governs a people where six parts of seven at least are poor, endebted, discontented, and armed.
Berkeleys misery soon increased.
About a thousand Virginians broke out of control in 1676, led by  a twenty-nine-year-old planter, Nathaniel Bacon.
Many of the rebels were frontiersmen who had been forced into the untamed backcountry in search of arable land.
They fiercely resented Berkeleys friendly policies toward the Indians, whose thriving fur trade the governor monopolized.
When Berkeley refused to retaliate for a series of savage Indian attacks on frontier settlements, Bacon and his followers took matters into their own hands.
They fell murderously upon the Indians, friendly and hostile alike, chased Berkeley from Jamestown, and put the torch to the capital.
Chaos swept the raw colony,  as frustrated freemen and resentful servants described as a rabble of the basest sort of people went on a rampage of plundering and pilfering.
As this civil war in Virginia ground on, Bacon suddenly died of disease, like so many of his fellow colonists.
Berkeley thereupon crushed the uprising with brutal cruelty, hanging more than twenty rebels.
Back in England Charles II complained, That old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than I did here for the murder of my father.
The distant English king could scarcely imagine the depths of passion and fear that Bacons Rebellion excited in Virginia.
Bacon had ignited the smoldering unhappiness of landless former servants, and he had pitted the hardscrabble backcountry frontiersmen against the haughty gentry of the  C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 for having protected, favored, and emboldened the Indians against His Majestys loyal subjects, never contriving, requiring, or appointing any due or proper means of satisfaction for their many invasions, robberies, and murders committed upon us.
I have lived thirty-four years amongst you [Virginians], as uncorrupt and diligent as ever [a] Governor was, [while] Bacon is a man of two years amongst you, his person and qualities unknown to most of you, and to all men else, by any virtuous act that ever I heard of.
I will take counsel of wiser men than myself, but Mr.
Bacon has none about him but the lowest of the people.
Legal documents, such as this contract signed in  Virginia in 1746, not only provide evidence about the ever-changing rules by which societies have regulated their affairs, but also furnish rich information about the conditions of life and the terms of human relationships in the past.
This agreement between Thomas Clayton and James Griffin provides a reminder that not all indentured servants in early America came from abroad.
Indentured servitude could be equivalent to an apprenticeship, in which a young person traded several years of service to a master in exchange for instruction in the masters craft.
Here Clayton pledges himself to five years in Griffins employ in return for a promise to initiate the young man into the "Mystery" of the masters craft.
Why might the masters trade be described as a "mystery"?
From the evidence of this contract, what are the principal objectives of each of the parties to it?
What problems does each anticipate?
What obligations does each assume?
What does the consent of  Claytons mother to the contract suggest about the young mans situation?
tidewater plantations.
The rebellion was now suppressed, but these tensions remained.
Lordly planters, surrounded by a still-seething sea of  malcontents, anxiously looked about for less troublesome laborers to toil in the restless tobacco  kingdom.
Their eyes soon lit on Africa.
Perhaps 10 million Africans were carried in chains to the New World in the three centuries or so following Columbuss landing.
Only about 400,000 of them ended up in North America, the great majority arriving after 1700.
Most of the early human cargoes were hauled to Spanish and Portuguese South America or to the sugar-rich West Indies.
Africans had been brought to Jamestown as early as 1619, but as late as 1670 they numbered only about 2,000 in Virginia (out of a total population of some 35,000 persons) and about 7 percent  of the 50,000 people in the southern plantation colonies as a whole.
Hard-pinched white colonists, struggling to stay alive and to hack crude clearings out of the forests, could not afford to pay high prices for slaves who might die soon after arrival.
White servants might die, too, but they were far less costly.
Drastic change came in the 1680s.
Rising wages in England shrank the pool of penniless folk willing to gamble on a new life or an early death as indentured servants in America.
At the same time, the large C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 Spanish America 292,500 578,600 871,100 11.7 Brazil 560,000 1,891,400 2,451,400 33 British Caribbean 263,700 1,401,000 1,664,700 22.5 Dutch Caribbean 40,000 460,000 500,000 6.7 French Caribbean 155,800 1,348,400 1,504,200 20.3 Danish Caribbean 4,000 24,000 28,000 .4 British North America 10,000 390,000 400,000 5.4 and future United States TOTAL 7,419,400 100 This table clearly shows the huge concentration of the slave system in the Caribbean and South America.
British North Americas southern colonies constituted the extreme northern periphery of this system.
[Source: Philip D. Curtin,  planters were growing increasingly fearful of the multitudes of potentially mutinous former servants in their midst.
By the mid-1680s, for the first time, black slaves outnumbered white servants among the plantation colonies new arrivals.
In 1698 the Royal African Company, first chartered in 1672, lost its crowngranted monopoly on carrying slaves to the colonies.
Enterprising Americans, especially Rhode Islanders, rushed to cash in on the lucrative slave trade, and the supply of slaves rose steeply.
More than ten thousand Africans were pushed ashore in America in the decade after 1700, and tens of thousands more in the next half-century.
Blacks accounted for nearly half the population of Virginia by 1750.
In South Carolina they outnumbered whites two to one.
Most of the slaves who reached North America came from the west coast of Africa, especially the area stretching from present-day Senegal to Angola.
They were originally captured by African coastal tribes, who traded them in crude markets on the shimmering tropical beaches to itinerant Europeanand Americanflesh merchants.
Usually branded and bound, the captives were herded aboard sweltering ships for the gruesome middle passage, on which death rates ran as high as 20 percent.
Terrified survivors were eventually shoved onto auction blocks in New World ports like Newport, Rhode Island, or Charleston, South Carolina, There is a saying, that we should do to all men like as we will be done ourselves.
But to bring men hither, or to rob and sell them against their will, we stand against.
Pray, what thing in the world can be done worse towards us, than if men should rob or steal us away, and sell us for slaves to strange countries, separating husbands from their wives and children?
Equator UNITED STATES BRAZIL SENEGAL GAMBIA GUINEA BISSAU  SIERRA LEONE GUINEA LIBERIA BURKINA FASO NIGERIA CAMEROON EQUITORIAL GUINEA GABON CONGO ANGOLA GHANA TOGO CTE D'IVOIRE BENIN WEST INDIES WEST AFRICA A F R I C A S O U T H A M E R I C A Charleston Sources of Slaves Present-day boundaries of African countries Main Sources of African Slaves, c.
1500 1800 The three centuries of the African diaspora scattered blacks all over the New World, with about 400,000 coming to North America.
where a giant slave market traded in human misery for more than a century.
A few of the earliest African immigrants gained their freedom, and some even became slaveowners themselves.
But as the number of Africans in their midst increased dramatically toward the end of the seventeenth century, white colonists reacted remorselessly to this supposed racial threat.
Earlier in the century the legal difference between a slave and a servant was unclear.
But now the law began to make sharp distinctions between the twolargely on the basis of race.
Beginning in Virginia in 1662, statutes appeared that formally decreed the iron conditions of slavery for blacks.
These earliest slave codes made blacks  white masters.
Some colonies made it a crime to teach a slave to read or write.
Not even conversion to Christianity could qualify a slave for freedom.
Thus did the God-fearing whites put the fear of God into their hapless black laborers.
Slavery might have begun in America for economic reasons, but by the end of the seventeenth century, it was clear that racial discrimination also powerfully molded the American slave system.
In the deepest South, slave life was especially severe.
The climate was hostile to health, and the labor was life-draining.
The widely scattered South Carolina rice and indigo plantations were lonely hells on earth where gangs of mostly male Africans toiled and perished.
Only fresh imports could sustain the slave population under these loathsome conditions.
Blacks in the tobacco-growing Chesapeake region had a somewhat easier lot.
Tobacco was a less physically demanding crop than those of the deeper South.
Tobacco plantations were larger and closer to one another than rice plantations.
The size and proximity of these plantations permitted the slaves more frequent contact with friends and relatives.
By about 1720 the proportion of females in the Chesapeake slave population had begun to rise, making family life possible.
The captive black population of the Chesapeake area soon began to grow not only through new imports but also through its own fertilitymaking it one of the few slave societies in history to perpetuate itself by its own natural reproduction.
C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 Native-born African-Americans contributed to the growth of a stable and distinctive slave culture, a mixture of African and American elements of speech, religion, and folkways (see Makers of America: From African to African-American,  pp.
7475).
On the sea islands off South Carolinas coast, blacks evolved a unique language,  (probably a corruption of  from which many of them had come).
It blended English with several African languages, including Yoruba, Ibo, and Hausa.
Through it many African words have passed into American speechsuch as craft).
The ringshout, a West African religious dance performed by shuffling in a circle while answering a preachers shouts, was brought to colonial America by slaves and eventually contributed to the development of jazz.
The banjo and the bongo drum were other African contributions to American culture.
Slaves also helped mightily to build the country with their labor.
A few became skilled artisanscarpenters, bricklayers, and tanners.
But chiefly they performed the sweaty toil of clearing swamps, grubbing out trees, and other menial tasks.
Condemned to life under the lash, slaves naturally pined for freedom.
A slave revolt erupted in New York City in 1712 that cost the lives of a dozen whites and caused the execution of twenty-one blacks, some of them burned at the stake over a slow fire.
More than fifty resentful South Carolina blacks along the Stono River exploded in revolt in 1739 and tried to march to Spanish Florida, only to be stopped by the local militia.
But in the end the slaves in the South proved to be a more manageable labor force than the white indentured servants they gradually replaced.
No slave uprising in American history matched the scale of Bacons Rebellion.
As slavery spread, the gaps in the Souths social structure widened.
The rough equality of poverty and disease of the early days was giving way to a defined hierarchy of wealth and status in the early eighteenth century.
At the top of this southern social ladder perched a small but powerful covey of great planters.
Owning gangs of slaves and vast domains of land, the planters ruled the regions economy and virtually monopolized political power.
A clutch of extended clanssuch as the Fitzhughs, the Lees, and the Washingtonspossessed among them horizonless tracts of Virginia real estate, and together they dominated the House of Burgesses.
Just before the Revolutionary War, 70 percent of the leaders of the Virginia legislature came from families established in Virginia before 1690the famed first families of Virginia, or FFVs.
Yet, legend to the contrary, these great seventeenth-century merchant planters were not silkswathed cavaliers gallantly imitating the ways of English country gentlemen.
They did eventually build stately riverfront manors, occasionally rode to the hounds, and some of them even cultivated the arts and accumulated distinguished libraries.
But for the most part, they were a hard-working, businesslike lot, laboring long hours over the problems ragged in chains from West African shores, the first African-Americans struggled to preserve their diverse heritages from the ravages of slavery.
Their children, the first generation of American-born slaves, melded these various African traditions Guinean, Ibo, Yoruba, Angolaninto a distinctive African-American culture.
Their achievement sustained them during the cruelties of enslavement and has endured to enrich American life to this day.
With the arrival of the first Africans in the seventeenth century, a cornucopia of African traditions poured into the New World: handicrafts and skills in numerous trades; a plethora of languages, musics, and cuisines; even rice-planting techniques that conquered the inhospitable soil of South Carolina.
It was North Americas rice paddies, tilled by experienced West Africans, that introduced rice into the English diet and furnished so many English tables with the sticky staple.
These first American slaves were mostly males.
Upon arrival they were sent off to small isolated farms, where social contact with other Africans, especially women, was an unheard-of luxury.
Yet their legal status was at first uncertain.
A few slaves were able to buy their freedom in the seventeenth century.
One, Anthony Johnson of Northampton County, Virginia, actually became a slaveholder himself.
But by the beginning of the eighteenth century, a settled slave society was emerging in the southern colonies.
Laws tightened; slave traders stepped up their deliveries of human cargo; large plantations formed.
Most significantly, a new generation of American-born slaves joined their forebears at labor in the fields.
By 1740 large groups of slaves lived together on sprawling plantations, the Americanborn outnumbered the African-born, and the importation of African slaves slowed.
Forging a common culture and finding a psychological weapon with which to resist their masters and preserve their dignity were daunting challenges for American-born slaves.
Plantation life was beastly, an endless cycle of miserable toil in the field or foundry from sunup to sundown.
Female slaves were forced to perform double duty.
After a days backbreaking work, women were expected to sit up for hours spinning, weaving, or sewing to clothe themselves and their families.
Enslaved women also lived in constant fear of sexual exploitation by conscienceless masters.
Yet eventually a vibrant slave culture began to flower.
And precisely because of the diversity of African peoples represented in America, the culture that emerged was a uniquely New World creation.
It derived from no single African model and incorporated many Western elements, though often with significant modifications.
Slave religion illustrates this pattern.
Cut off from their native African religions, most slaves became Christians but fused elements of African and Western traditions and drew their own conclusions from Scripture.
White Christians might point to Christs teachings of humility and obedience to encourage slaves to stay in their place, but black Christians emphasized Gods role in freeing the Hebrews from slavery and saw Jesus as the Messiah who would deliver them from bondage.
They also often retained an African definition of heaven as  a place where they would be reunited with their ancestors.
At their Sunday and evening-time prayer meetings, slaves also patched African remnants onto conventional Christian ritual.
Black Methodists, for example, ingeniously evaded the traditional Methodist ban on dancing as sinful: three or four people would stand still in a ring, clapping hands and beating time with their feet (but never crossing their legs, thus not officially dancing), while others walked around the ring, singing in unison.
This ringshout derived from African practices; modern American dances, including the Charleston, in turn derived from this African-American hybrid.
Christian slaves also often used outwardly religious songs as encoded messages about escape or rebellion.
Good News, the Chariots Comin might sound like an innocent hymn about divine deliverance, but it could also announce the arrival of a guide to lead fugitives safely to the North.
Similarly, Wade in the Water taught fleeing slaves one way of covering their trail.
The Negro spirituals that took shape as a distinctive form of American music thus had their origins in  Indeed, much American music was born in the slave quarters from African importations.
Jazz, with its meandering improvisations and complex syncopations and rhythms, constitutes the most famous example.
But this rich cultural harvest came at the cost of generations of human agony.
of plantation management.
Few problems were more vexatious than the unruly, often surly, servants.
One Virginia governor had such difficulty keeping his servants sober that he struck a deal allowing them to get drunk the next day if they would only lay off the liquor long enough to look after his guests at a celebration of the queens birthday in 1711.
Beneath the plantersfar beneath them in wealth, prestige, and political powerwere the small farmers, the largest social group.
They tilled their modest plots and might own one or two slaves, but they lived a ragged, hand-to-mouth existence.
Still lower on the social scale were the landless whites, most of them luckless former indentured servants.
Under them were those persons still serving out the term of their indenture.
Their numbers gradually diminished as black slaves increasingly replaced white indentured servants toward the end of the  seventeenth century.
The oppressed black slaves, of course, remained enchained in societys basement.
Few cities sprouted in the colonial South, and consequently an urban professional class, including lawyers and financiers, was slow to emerge.
Southern life revolved around the great plantations, distantly isolated from one another.
Waterways provided the principal means of transportation.
Roads were so wretched that in bad weather funeral parties could not reach church burial groundsan obstacle that accounts for the development of family burial plots in the South, a practice unlike anything in old England or New England.
Nature smiled more benignly on pioneer New Englanders than on their disease-plagued fellow colonists to the south.
Clean water and cool temperatures retarded the spread of killer microbes.
In stark contrast to the fate of Chesapeake immigrants, settlers in seventeenth-century New England  ten years to their life spans by migrating from the Old World.
One settler claimed that a sip of New Englands air is better than a whole draft of old Englands ale.
The first generations of Puritan colonists enjoyed, on the average, about seventy years on this earthnot very different from the life expectancy of present-day Americans.
C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 In further contrast with the Chesapeake, New Englanders tended to migrate not as single individuals but as families, and the family remained at the center of New England life.
Almost from the outset, New Englands population grew from natural reproductive increase.
The people were remarkably fertile, even if the soil was not.
Early marriage encouraged the booming birthrate.
Women typically wed by their early twenties and produced babies about every two years thereafter until menopause.
Ceaseless childbearing drained the vitality of many pioneer women, as the weather-eroded colonial tombstones eloquently reveal.
A number of the largest families were borne by several mothers, though claims about the frequency of death in childbirth have probably been exaggerated.
But the dread of death in the birthing bed haunted many women, and it was small wonder that they came to fear pregnancy.
A married woman could expect to experience up to ten pregnancies and rear as many as eight surviving children.
Massachusetts governor William Phips was one of twenty-seven children, all by the same mother.
A New England woman might well have dependent children living in her household from the earliest days of her marriage up until the day of her death, and child raising became in essence her full-time occupation.
The longevity of the New Englanders contributed to family stability.
Children grew up in nurturing environments where they were expected to learn habits of obedience, above all.
They received guidance not only from their parents but from their grandparents as well.
This novel intergenerational continuity has inspired the observation that New England invented grandparents.
Family stability was reflected in low premarital pregnancy rates (again in contrast with the Chesapeake) and in the generally strong, tranquil social structure characteristic of colonial New England.
Still other contrasts came to differentiate the southern and New England ways of life.
Oddly enough, the fragility of southern families advanced the economic security of southern women, especially of womens property rights.
Because southern men frequently died young, leaving widows with small children to support, the southern colonies generally allowed married women to retain separate title to No country yields a more propitious air for our temper than New England.
Many of our people that have found themselves always weak and sickly at home, have become strong and healthy there: perhaps by the dryness of the air and constant temper[ature] of it, which seldom varies from cold to heat, as it does with us.
Neither are the natives at any time troubled with pain of teeth, soreness of eyes, or ache in their limbs.
their property and gave widows the right to inherit their husbands estates.
But in New England, Puritan lawmakers worried that recognizing womens  separate property rights would undercut the unity of married persons by acknowledging conflicting interests between husband and wife.
New England women usually gave up their property rights, therefore, when they married.
Yet in contrast to old England, the laws of New England made secure provision for the property rights of widowsand even extended important protections to women within marriage.
A true wife accounts subjection her honor, one Massachusetts Puritan leader declared, expressing a sentiment then common in Europe as well as America.
But in the New World, a rudimentary conception of womens rights as individuals was beginning to appear in the seventeenth century.
Women still could not vote, and the popular attitude persisted that they were morally weaker than men a belief rooted in the biblical tale of Eves treachery in the Garden of Eden.
But a husbands power over his wife was not absolute.
The New England authorities could and did intervene to restrain abusive spouses.
One man was punished for kicking his wife off a stool; another was disciplined for drawing an uncivil portrait of his mate in the snow.
Women also had some spheres of autonomy.
Midwifery assisting with childbirthswas a virtual female monopoly, and midwives often fostered networks of women bonded by the common travails of motherhood.
One Boston midwife alone delivered over three thousand babies.
Above all, the laws of Puritan New England sought to defend the integrity of marriages.
Divorce was exceedingly rare, and the authorities commonly ordered separated couples to reunite.
Outright abandonment was among the very few permissible grounds for divorce.
Adultery was another.
Convicted adulterersespecially if they were women were whipped in public and forced forever after to wear the capital letter A cut out in cloth and sewed on their outer garmentthe basis for Nathaniel Hawthornes famous 1850 tale,  Sturdy New Englanders evolved a tightly knit society, the basis of which was small villages and farms.
This development was natural in a people anchored by geography and hemmed in by the Indians, the French, and the Dutch.
Puritanism likewise made for unity of purposeand for concern about the moral health of the whole community.
It was no accident that the nineteenth-century crusade for C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 abolishing black slaverywith Massachusetts agitators at the forefrontsprang in some degree from the New England conscience, with its Puritan roots.
In the Chesapeake region, the expansion of settlement was somewhat random and was usually undertaken by lone-wolf planters on their own initiative, but New England society grew in a more orderly fashion.
New towns were legally chartered by the colonial authorities, and the distribution of land was entrusted to the steady hands of soberminded town fathers, or proprietors.
After receiving a grant of land from the colonial legislature, the proprietors moved themselves and their families to the designated place and laid out their town.
It usually consisted of a meetinghouse, which served as both the place of worship and the town hall, surrounded by houses.
Also marked out was a village green, where the militia could drill.
Each family received several parcels of land, including a woodlot for fuel, a tract suitable for growing crops, and another for pasturing animals.
Towns of more than fifty families were required to provide elementary education, and a majority of the adults knew how to read and write.
As early as 1636, just eight years after the colonys founding, the Massachusetts Puritans established Harvard College, today the oldest corporation in America, to train local boys for the ministry.
Only in 1693, eightysix years after staking out Jamestown, did the Virginians establish their first college, William and Mary.
Puritans ran their own churches, and democracy in Congregational Church government led logically to democracy in political government.
The town meeting, in which the adult males met together and each man voted, was a showcase and a classroom for democracy.
New England villagers from the outset gathered regularly in their meetinghouses to elect their officials, appoint schoolmasters, and discuss such mundane matters as road repairs.
The town meeting, observed Thomas Jefferson, was the best school of political liberty the world ever saw.
Yet worries plagued the God-fearing pioneers of these tidy New England settlements.
The pressure  of a growing population was gradually dispersing It being one chief project of the old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue, it is therefore ordered that every township in this jurisdiction, after the Lord has increased them [in] number to fifty householders, shall then forthwith appoint one within their town to teach all such children as shall resort to him to write and read, whose wages shall be paid either by the parents or masters of such children, or by the inhabitants in general.
the Puritans onto outlying farms, far from the control of church and neighbors.
And although the core of Puritan belief still burned brightly, the passage of time was dampening the first generations flaming religious zeal.
About the middle of the seventeenth century, a new form of sermon began to be heard from Puritan pulpitsthe jeremiad.
Taking their cue from the doom-saying Old Testament prophet Jeremiah, earnest preachers scolded parishioners for their waning piety.
Especially alarming was the apparent decline in conversionstestimonials by individuals that they had received Gods grace and therefore deserved to be admitted to the church as members of the elect.
Troubled ministers in 1662 announced a new formula for church membership, the Half-Way Covenant.
This new arrangement modified the covenant, or the agreement between the church and its adherents, to admit to baptism but not full communionthe unconverted children of existing members.
By conferring partial membership rights in the once-exclusive Puritan congregations, the Half-Way Covenant weakened the distinction between the elect and others, further diluting the spiritual purity of the original settlers godly community.
The Half-Way Covenant dramatized the difficulty of maintaining at fever pitch the religious devotion of the founding generation.
Jeremiads continued to thunder from the pulpits, but as time went on, the doors of the Puritan churches swung fully open to all comers, whether converted or not.
This widening of church membership gradually erased the distinction between the elect and other members of society.
In effect, strict religious purity was sacrificed somewhat to the cause of wider religious participation.
Interestingly, from about this time onward, women were in the majority in the Puritan congregations.
Women also played a prominent role in one  of New Englands most frightening religious episodes.
A group of adolescent girls in Salem, Massachusetts, claimed to have been bewitched by certain older women.
A hysterical witch hunt ensued, leading to the legal lynching in 1692 of twenty individuals, nineteen of whom were hanged and one of whom was pressed to death.
Two dogs were also hanged.
Larger-scale witchcraft persecutions were then common in Europe, and several outbreaks had already flared forth in the coloniesoften directed at property-owning women.
But the reign of horror in Salem grew not only from the superstitions and prejudices of the age but also from the unsettled social and religious conditions of the rapidly evolving Massachusetts village.
Most of the accused witches came from families associated with Salems burgeoning market economy; their accusers came largely from subsistence farming families in Salems hinterland.
The episode thus reflected the widening social stratification of New England, as well as the fear of many religious traditionalists that the Puritan heritage was being eclipsed by Yankee commercialism.
The witchcraft hysteria eventually ended in 1693 when the governor, alarmed by an accusation against his own wife and supported by the more responsible members of the clergy, prohibited any further trials and pardoned those already convicted.
Twenty years later a penitent Massachusetts legislature annulled C HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 the convictions of the witches and made reparations to their heirs.
The Salem witchcraft delusion marked an all-time high in the American experience of popular passions run wild.
Witch-hunting passed into the American vocabulary as a metaphor for the often dangerously irrational urge to find a scapegoat for social resentments.
Oddly enough, the story of New England was largely written by rocks.
The heavily glaciated soil was strewn with countless stones, many of which were forced to the surface after a winter freeze.
In a sense the Puritans did not possess the soil; it possessed them by shaping their character.
Scratching a living from the protesting earth was an early American success story.
Back-bending toil put a premium on industry and penny-pinching frugality, for which New Englanders became famous.
Traditionally sharp Yankee traders, some of them palming off wooden nutmegs, made their mark.
Connecticut came in time to be called good-humoredly the Nutmeg State.
Cynics exaggerated when they said that the three stages of progress in New England were to get on, to get honor, to get honest.
The grudging land also left colonial New England less ethnically mixed than its southern neighbors.
European immigrants were not attracted in great numbers to a site where the soil was so stonyand the sermons so sulfurous.
Climate likewise molded New England, where the summers were often uncomfortably hot and the winters cruelly cold.
Many early immigrants complained of the regions extremes of weather.
Yet the soil and climate of New England eventually encouraged a diversified agriculture and industry.
Staple products like tobacco did not flourish, as in the South.
Black slavery, although attempted, could not exist profitably on small farms, especially where the surest crop was stones.
No broad, fertile expanses comparable to those in the tidewater South beckoned people inland.
The mountains ran fairly close to the shore, and the rivers were generally short and rapid.
And just as the land shaped New Englanders, so they shaped the land.
The Native Americans had  left an early imprint on the New England earth.
They traditionally beat trails through the woods as they migrated seasonally for hunting and fishing.
They periodically burned the woodlands to restore leafy first-growth forests that would sustain the deer population.
The Indians recognized the right to  the land, but the concept of exclusive, individual The English settlers had a different philosophy.
They condemned the Indians for wasting the earth by underutilizing its bounty and used this logic to justify their own expropriation of the land from the native inhabitants.
Consistent with this outlook, the Europeans felt a virtual duty to improve the land by clearing woodlands for pasturage and tillage, building roads and fences, and laying out permanent settlements.
Some of the greatest changes resulted from the introduction of livestock.
The English brought pigs, horses, sheep, and cattle from Europe to the settlements.
Because the growing herds needed ever more pastureland, the colonists were continually clearing forests.
The animals voracious appetites and heavy hooves compacted the soil, speeding erosion and flooding.
In some cases the combined effect of these developments actually may have changed local climates and made some areas even more susceptible to extremes of heat and cold.
Repelled by the rocks, the hardy New Englanders turned instinctively to their fine natural harbors.
Hacking timber from their dense forests, they became experts in shipbuilding and commerce.
They also ceaselessly exploited the self-perpetuating codfish lode off the coast of Newfoundlandthe fishy gold mines of New England, which have yielded more wealth than all the treasure chests of the Aztecs.
During colonial days the wayfarer seldom got far from the sound of the ax and hammer, or the swift rush of the ship down the ways to the sea, or the smell of rotting fish.
As a reminder of the importance of fishing, a handsome replica of the sacred cod is proudly displayed to this day in the Massachusetts Statehouse in Boston.
The combination of Calvinism, soil, and climate in New England made for energy, purposefulness, sternness, stubbornness, self-reliance, and resourcefulness.
Righteous New Englanders prided themselves on being Gods chosen people.
They long boasted that Boston was the hub of the universe at least in spirit.
A famous jingle of later days ran New England has had an incalculable impact on the rest of the nation.
Ousted by their sterile soil, thousands of New Englanders scattered from Ohio to Oregon and even Hawaii.
They sprinkled the land with new communities modeled on the orderly New England town, with its central green and tidy schoolhouse, and its simple town-meeting democracy.
Yankee ingenuity, originally fostered by the flinty fields and comfortless climate of New England, came to be claimed by all Americans as a proud national trait.
And the fabled New England conscience, born of the steadfast Puritan heritage, left a legacy of high idealism in the national character and inspired many later reformers.
The cycles of the seasons and the sun set the schedules of all the earliest American colonists, men as well as women, blacks as well as whites.
The overwhelming majority of colonists were farmers.
They planted in the spring, tended their crops in the summer, harvested in the fall, and prepared in the winter to begin the cycle anew.
They usually rose at dawn and went to bed at dusk.
Chores might be performed after nightfall only if they were worth the candle, a phrase that has persisted in American speech.
Women, slave or free, on southern plantations or northern farms, wove, cooked, cleaned, and cared for children.
Men cleared land; fenced, planted, and cropped it; cut firewood; and butchered livestock as needed.
Children helped with all these tasks, while picking up such schooling as they could.
Life was humble but comfortable by contemporary standards.
Compared to most seventeenthcentury Europeans, Americans lived in affluent abundance.
Land was relatively cheap, though somewhat less available in the planter-dominated South than elsewhere.
In the northern and middle colonies, an acre of virgin soil cost about what American carpenters could earn in one day as wages, which were roughly three times those of their English counterparts.
Dukes dont emigrate, the saying goes, for if people enjoy wealth and security, they are not likely to risk exposing their lives in the wilderness.
Similarly, the very poorest members of a society may not possess even the modest means needed to pull up stakes and seek a fresh start in life.
Accordingly, most white migrants to early colonial America came neither from the aristocracy nor from the dregs of European societywith the partial exception of the impoverished indentured servants.
Crude frontier life did not in any case permit the flagrant display of class distinctions, and sevenC HAPTER 4 American Life in the Seventeenth Century, 16071692 teenth-century society in all the colonies had a certain simple sameness to it, especially in the more egalitarian New England and middle colonies.
Yet many settlers, who considered themselves to be of the better sort, tried to re-create on a modified scale the social structure they had known in the Old World.
To some extent they succeeded, though yeasty democratic forces frustrated their full triumph.
Resentment against upper-class pretensions helped to spark outbursts like Bacons Rebellion of 1676 in Virginia and the uprising of Marylands Protestants toward the end of the seventeenth century.
In New York animosity between lordly landholders and aspiring merchants fueled Leislers Rebellion, an ill-starred and bloody insurgence that rocked New York City from 1689 to 1691.
For their part, would-be American blue bloods resented the pretensions of the meaner sort and passed laws to try to keep them in their place.
Massachusetts in 1651 prohibited poorer folk from wearing gold or silver lace, and in eighteenthcentury Virginia a tailor was fined and jailed for arranging to race his horsea sport only for gentlemen.
But these efforts to reproduce the finely stratified societies of Europe proved feeble in the early American wilderness, where equality and democracy found fertile soilat least for white  people.
First Africans arrive in Virginia Harvard College founded Half-Way Covenant for Congregational  Church membership established Virginia assembly disfranchises landless  freeman Bacons Rebellion in Virginia Mass expansion of slavery in colonies Leislers Rebellion in New York Salem witch trials in Massachusetts College of William and Mary founded Royal African Company slave trade  monopoly ended New York City slave revolt South Carolina slave revolt For further reading, see page A3 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution  17001775 S AMUEL A DAMS , 1776 T he common term  misleading.
Britain ruled thirty-two colonies in North America by 1775, including Canada, the Floridas, and various Caribbean islands.
But only thirteen of them unfurled the standard of rebellion.
A few of the nonrebels, such as Canada and Jamaica, were larger, wealthier, or more populous than some of the revolting thirteen.
Why, then, did some British colonies eventually strike for their independence, while others did not?
Part of the answer is to be found in the distinctive social, economic, and political structures of the thirteen Atlantic seaboard coloniesand in the halting, gradual appearance of a recognizably  Among the distinguishing characteristics that the eventually rebellious settlements shared was lusty population growth.
In 1700 they contained fewer than 300,000 souls, about 20,000 of whom were black.
By 1775, 2.5 million people inhabited the thirteen colonies, of whom about half a million were black.
White immigrants made up nearly 400,000 of the increased number, and black forced immigrants accounted for almost as many again.
But most of the spurt stemmed from the remarkable natural fertility of all Americans, white and black.
To the amazement and dismay of Europeans, the colonists were  doubling their numbers every twenty-five years.
Unfriendly Dr.
Samuel Johnson, back in England, growled that the Americans were multiplying like their own rattlesnakes.
They were also a youthful people, whose average age in 1775 was about sixteen.
This population boom had political consequences.
In 1700 there were twenty English subjects for each American colonist.
By 1775 the English advantage in numbers had fallen to three to one setting the stage for a momentous shift in the balance of power between the colonies and Britain.
The bulk of the population was cooped up east of the Alleghenies, although by 1775 a vanguard of pioneers had trickled into the stump-studded clearings of Tennessee and Kentucky.
The most populous colonies in 1775 were Virginia, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and Marylandin that order.
Only four communities could properly be called cities: Philadelphia, including suburbs, was first with about 34,000 residents, trailed by New York, Boston, and Charleston.
About 90 percent of the people lived in rural areas.
Colonial America was a melting pot and had been from the outset.
The population, although basically English in stock and language, was picturesquely mottled with numerous foreign groups.
Heavy-accented Germans constituted about 6 percent of the total population, or 150,000, by 1775.
Fleeing religious persecution, economic oppression, and the ravages of war, they had flocked to America in the early 1700s and had settled chiefly in Pennsylvania.
They belonged to several different Protestant sectsprimarily Lutheranand thus further enhanced the religious diversity of the colony.
Known popularly but erroneously as the Pennsylvania Dutch (a corruption of the German word   one-third of the colonys population.
In parts of Philadelphia, the street signs were painted in both German and English.
These German newcomers moved into the backcountry of Pennsylvania, where their splendid stone barns gaveand still givemute evidence of industry and prosperity.
Not having been brought up English, they had no deep-rooted loyalty to the British crown, and they clung tenaciously to their German language and customs.
The Scots-Irish (see Makers of America: The Scots-Irish, pp.
8889), who in 1775 numbered about 175,000, or 7 percent of the population, were an important non-English group, although they spoke English.
They were not Irish at all, but turbulent Scots Lowlanders.
Over many decades, though, they had been transplanted to Northern Ireland, where they had not prospered.
The Irish Catholics already there, hating Scottish Presbyterianism, resented the intruders and still do.
The economic life of the Scots-Irish was severely hampered, especially when the English government placed burdensome restrictions on their production of linens and woolens.
Early in the 1700s, tens of thousands of embittered Scots-Irish finally abandoned Ireland and came to America, chiefly to tolerant and deepsoiled Pennsylvania.
Finding the best acres already taken by Germans and Quakers, they pushed out ;; ;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;; ;;;;; ;;; ; ; ;;; ;;;;; ;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;;;; ;;;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;; ;; ;; ;;; ;;;;; ;;;;; ;;;; ;; Portsmouth Falmouth Montreal Boston Albany Hartford Newport Salem Newburyport New Haven New York Oswego Iroquois Confederation Philadelphia Pittsburgh Williamsburg Baltimore Norfolk Richmond Charleston Savannah Wilmington Proclamation Line of 1763 Ft.
Niagara MAINE (Part of Mass.
) N.H.
MASS.
R.I.
N.Y.
N.J.
QUEBEC C A N A D A VA.
N.C.
S.C.
DEL.
;; ;;;; ;;; ; Cities with more than 10,000 inhabitants, c.
1770 Extent of areas settled by 1650 Extent of areas settled by 1700 French Huguenots Jews Welsh Swedes Extent of areas settled by 1770 are represented by patterns below: Africans Germans & Swiss Dutch French English Scots-Irish Scots Highlanders Immigrant Groups in 1775 America was already a nation of diverse nationalities in the colonial period.
This map shows the great variety of immigrant groups, especially in Pennsylvania and New York.
It also illustrates the tendency of later arrivals, particularly the  Scots-Irish, to push into the backcountry.
onto the frontier.
There many of them illegally but defiantly squatted on the unoccupied lands and quarreled with both Indian and white owners.
When the westward-flowing Scots-Irish tide lapped up against the Allegheny barrier, it was deflected southward into the backcountry of Maryland, down Virginias Shenandoah Valley, and into the western Carolinas.
Already experienced colonizers and agitators in Ireland, the Scots-Irish proved to be superb frontiersmen, though their readiness to visit violence on the Indians repeatedly inflamed the western districts.
By the mid-eighteenth century, a chain of Scots-Irish settlements lay scattered along the great wagon road, which hugged the eastern Appalachian foothills from Pennsylvania to Georgia.
It was said, somewhat unfairly, that the ScotsIrish kept the Sabbathand all else they could lay their hands on.
Pugnacious, lawless, and individualistic, they brought with them the Scottish secrets of whiskey distilling and dotted the Appalachian hills and hollows with their stills.
They cherished no love for the British government that had uprooted them and still lorded over themor for any other government, it seemed.
They led the armed march of the Paxton Boys on Philadelphia in 1764, protesting the Quaker oligarchys lenient policy toward the Indians, and a few years later spearheaded the Regulator movement in North Carolina, a small but nasty insurrection against eastern domination of the colonys affairs.
Many of these hotheadsincluding the young Andrew Jacksoneventually joined the embattled American revolutionists.
All told, about a dozen future presidents were of Scots-Irish descent.
Approximately 5 percent of the multicolored colonial population consisted of other European groups.
These embraced French Huguenots, Welsh, Dutch, Swedes, Jews, Irish, Swiss, and Scots Highlandersas distinguished from the Scots-Irish.
Except for the Scots Highlanders, such hodgepodge elements felt little loyalty to the British crown.
By far the largest single non-English group was African, accounting for nearly 20 percent of the colonial population in 1775 and heavily concentrated in the South.
The population of the thirteen colonies, though mainly Anglo-Saxon, was perhaps the most mixed to be found anywhere in the world.
The South, holding about 90 percent of the slaves, already displayed its historic black-and-white racial composition.
New England, mostly staked out by the original Puritan migrants, showed the least ethnic diversity.
The middle colonies, especially Pennsylvania, received the bulk of later white immigrants and boasted an astonishing variety of peoples.
Outside of New England, about one-half the population was non-English in 1775.
Of the fifty-six signers of the Declaration of Independence in 1776, eighteen were non-English and eight had not been born in the colonies.
As these various immigrant groups mingled and intermarried, they laid the foundations for a new C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 49% 19% 7% 7% 5% 3% 3% 9% English African Scottish German Scots-Irish Irish Dutch Other European Ethnic and Racial Composition of the American People, 1790 Based on surnames.
(Source: Adapted from the American Council of Learned Societies, Report of Committee on Linguistic and National Stocks in the Population of the United States, 1932.
Percentages total more than 100 percent due to rounding.
)  They are a mixture of English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes.
From this promiscuous breed, that race now called Americans have arisen.
I could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an Englishman, whose wife was Dutch, whose son married a French woman, and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations.
multicultural American national identity unlike anything known in Europe.
The French settler Michel-Guillaume de Crvecoeur saw in America in the 1770s a strange mixture of blood, which you will find in no other country, and he posed his classic question, What then is the American, this new man?
Nor were white colonists alone in creating new societies out of diverse ethnic groups.
The African slave trade long had mixed peoples from many different tribal backgrounds, giving birth to an Africangated in its cultural origins than anything to be found in Africa itself.
Similarly, in the New England praying towns, where Indians were gathered to be Christianized, and in Great Lakes villages such as Detroit, home to dozens of different displaced indigenous peoples, polyglot Native American communities emerged, blurring the boundaries of individual tribal identities.
In contrast with contemporary Europe, eighteenthcentury America was a shining land of equality and opportunitywith the notorious exception of slavery.
No titled nobility dominated society from on high, and no pauperized underclass threatened it from below.
Most white Americans, and even some free blacks, were small farmers.
Clad in buckskin breeches, they owned modest holdings and tilled them with their own hands and horses.
The cities contained a small class of skilled artisans, with their well-greased leather aprons, as well as a few shopkeepers and tradespeople, and a handful of unskilled casual laborers.
The most remarkable feature of the social ladder was the rags-to-riches ease with which an ambitious colonist, even a former indentured servant, might rise from a lower rung to a higher one, a rare step in old England.
Yet in contrast with seventeenth-century America, colonial society on the eve of the Revolution  was beginning to show signs of stratification and barriers to mobility that raised worries about the Europeanization of America.
The gods of war contributed to these developments.
The armed conflicts of the 1690s and early 1700s had enriched a number of merchant princes in the New England and middle colonies.
They laid the foundations of their fortunes with profits made as military suppliers.
Roosting regally atop the social ladder, these elites now feathered their nests more finely.
They sported imported clothing and dined at tables laid with English china and gleaming silverware.
Prominent individuals came to be seated in churches and schools according to their social rank.
By midcentury the richest 10 percent of Bostonians and Philadelphians owned nearly two-thirds of the taxable wealth in their cities.
The plague of war also created a class of widows and orphans, who became dependent for their survival on charity.
Both Philadelphia and New York built almshouses in the 1730s to care for the destitute.
Yet the numbers of poor people remained tiny compared to the numbers in England, where about a third of the population lived in impoverished squalor.
In the New England countryside, the descendants of the original settlers faced more limited prospects than had their pioneering forebears.
As the supply of unclaimed soil dwindled and families grew, existing landholdings were repeatedly A s the British Empire spread its dominion across the seas in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, great masses of people poured forth to populate its ever-widening realms.
Their migration unfolded in stages.
They journeyed from farms to towns, from towns to great cities like London and Bristol, and eventually from the seaports to Ireland, the Caribbean, and North America.
Among these intrepid wanderers, few were more restless than the Scots-Irish, the settlers of the first American West.
Never feeling at home in the British Empire, these perennial outsiders always headed for its most distant outposts.
They migrated first from their native Scottish lowlands to Northern Ireland and then on to the New World.
And even in North America, the Scots-Irish remained on the periphery, ever distancing themselves from the reach of the English crown and the Anglican Church.
Poverty weighed heavily on the Scottish Lowlands in the 1600s; one observer winced at the sight of the Scots, with their hovels most miserable, made of poles, wattled and covered with thin sods, their bodies shrunken yet swollen with hunger.
But Scotland had long been an unyielding land, and it was not simply natures stinginess that drove the Lowlanders to the ports.
The spread of commercial farming forced many Scots from the land and subjected others to merciless rent increases at the hands of the landowning  called rack-renting.
Adding insult to injury, the British authorities persecuted the Presbyterian Scots, squeezing taxes from their barren purses to support the hated Anglican Church.
Not surprisingly, then, some 200,000 Scots immigrated to neighboring Ireland in the 1600s.
So great was the exodus that Protestant Scots eventually outnumbered Catholic natives in the several northern Irish counties that compose the province of Ulster.
Still, Ireland offered only slender and temporary relief to many Scots.
Although the north was prosperous compared with the rest of that unhappy nation, making a living was still devilishly hard in Ireland.
Soon the Scots discovered that their migration had not freed them from their ancient woes.
Their Irish landlords, with British connivance, racked rents just as ferociously as their Scottish waves of these already once-transplanted Scots, now called Scots-Irish, fled yet again across the sea throughout the 1700s.
This time their destination was America.
Most debarked in Pennsylvania, seeking the religious tolerance and abundant land of William Penns commonwealth.
But these unquiet people did not stay put for long.
They fanned out from Philadelphia into the farmlands of western Pennsylvania.
Blocked temporarily by the Allegheny Mountains, these early pioneers then trickled south along the backbone of the Appalachian range, slowly filling the backcountry of Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia.
There they built farms and towns, and these rickety settlements bore the marks of ScotsIrish restlessness.
Whereas their German neighbors typically erected sturdy homes and cleared their fields meticulously, the Scots-Irish satisfied themselves with floorless, flimsy log cabins; they chopped down trees, planted crops between the stumps, exhausted the soil fast, and moved on.
Almost every Scots-Irish community, however isolated or impermanent, maintained a Presbyterian church.
Religion was the bond that yoked these otherwise fiercely independent folk.
In backcountry towns, churches were erected before law courts, and clerics were pounding their pulpits before civil authorities had the chance to raise their gavels.
In many such cases, the local religious court, known as the session, passed judgment on crimes like burglary and trespassing as well as on moral and theological questions.
But the Scots-Irish, despite their intense faith, were no theocrats, no advocates of religious rule.
Their bitter struggles with the Anglican Church made them stubborn opponents of established churches in the United States, just as their seething resentment against the king of England ensured that the Scots-Irish would be well represented among the Patriots in the American Revolution.
subdivided.
The average size of farms shrank drastically.
Younger sons, as well as daughters, were forced to hire out as wage laborers, or eventually to seek virgin tracts of land beyond the Alleghenies.
By 1750 Boston contained a large number of homeless poor, who were supported by public charity and compelled to wear a large red P on their clothing.
In the South the power of the great planters continued to be bolstered by their disproportionate ownership of slaves.
The riches created by the growing slave population in the eighteenth century were not distributed evenly among the whites.
Wealth was concentrated in the hands of the largest slaveowners, widening the gap between the prosperous gentry and the poor whites, who were more and more likely to become tenant farmers.
In all the colonies, the ranks of the lower classes were further swelled by the continuing stream of indentured servants, many of whom ultimately achieved prosperity and prestige.
Two became signers of the Declaration of Independence.
Far less fortunate than the voluntary indentured servants were the paupers and convicts involuntarily shipped to America.
Altogether, about fifty thousand jayle birds were dumped on the colonies by the London authorities.
This riffraff crowdincluding robbers, rapists, and murderers was generally sullen and undesirable, and not bubbling over with goodwill for the kings government.
But many convicts were the unfortunate victims of circumstances and of a viciously unfair English penal code that included about two hundred capital crimes.
Some of the deportees, in fact, came to be highly respectable citizens.
Least fortunate of all, of course, were the black slaves.
They enjoyed no equality with whites and dared not even dream of ascending, or even approaching, the ladder of opportunity.
Oppressed and downtrodden, the slaves were Americas closest approximation to Europes volatile lower classes, and fears of black rebellion plagued the white colonists.
Some colonial legislatures, notably South Carolinas in 1760, sensed the dangers present in a heavy concentration of resentful slaves and attempted to restrict or halt their importation.
But the British authorities, seeking to preserve the supply of cheap labor for the colonies, especially the West Indies sugar plantations, repeatedly vetoed all efforts to stem the transatlantic traffic in slaves.
Many North American colonists condemned these vetoes as morally callous, although New England slave traders benefited handsomely from the British policy.
The cruel complexity of the slavery issue was further revealed when Thomas Jefferson, himself a slaveholder, assailed the British vetoes in an early draft of the Declaration of Independence, but was forced to withdraw the proposed clause by a torrent of protest from southern slavemasters.
Most honored of the professions was the Christian ministry.
In 1775 the clergy wielded less influence than in the early days of Massachusetts, when piety had burned more warmly.
But they still occupied a position of high prestige.
Most physicians, on the other hand, were poorly trained and not highly esteemed.
Not until 1765 was the first medical school established, although European centers attracted some students.
Aspiring young doctors served for a while as apprentices to older practitioners and were then turned loose on their victims.
Bleeding was a favorite and frequently fatal remedy; when the physician was not available, a barber was often summoned.
Epidemics were a constant nightmare.
Especially dreaded was smallpox, which afflicted one out of five persons, including the heavily pockmarked George Washington.
A crude form of inoculation was introduced in 1721, despite the objections of many physicians and some of the clergy, who opposed tampering with the will of God.
Powdered dried toad was a favorite prescription for smallpox.
Diphtheria was also a deadly killer, especially of young people.
One epidemic in the 1730s took the C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 Almanack  God heals and the doctor takes the fee.
Hes the best physician that knows the worthlessness of most medicines.
Dont go to the doctor with every distemper, nor to the lawyer with every quarrel, nor to the pot for every thirst.
lives of thousands.
This grim reminder of their mortality may have helped to prepare many colonists in their hearts and minds for the religious revival that was soon to sweep them up.
At first the law profession was not favorably regarded.
In this pioneering society, which required much honest manual labor, the parties to a dispute often presented their own cases in court.
Lawyers were commonly regarded as noisy windbags or troublemaking rogues; an early Connecticut law classed them with drunkards and brothel keepers.
When future president John Adams was a young law student, the father of his wife-to-be frowned upon him as a suitor.
Agriculture was the leading industry, involving about 90 percent of the people.
Tobacco continued to be the staple crop in Maryland and Virginia, though wheat cultivation also spread through the Chesapeake, often on lands depleted by the overgrowth of tobacco.
The fertile middle (bread) colonies produced large quantities of grain, and by 1759 New York alone was exporting eighty thousand barrels of flour a year.
Seemingly the farmer had only to tickle the soil with a hoe, and it would laugh with a harvest.
Overall, Americans probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than the masses of any country in history up to that time.
Fishing (including whaling), though ranking far below agriculture, was rewarding.
Pursued in all  the American colonies, this harvesting of the sea was a major industry in New England, which exported smelly shiploads of dried cod to the Catholic countries of Europe.
The fishing fleet also stimulated shipbuilding and served as a nursery  for the seamen who manned the navy and merchant marine.
A bustling commerce, both coastwise and overseas, enriched all the colonies, especially the New England group, New York, and Pennsylvania.
Commercial ventures and land speculation, in the absence of later get-rich-quick schemes, were the surest avenues to speedy wealth.
Yankee seamen were famous in many climes not only as skilled mariners but as tightfisted traders.
They provisioned the Caribbean sugar islands with food and forest products.
They hauled Spanish and Portuguese gold, wine, and oranges to London, to be exchanged for industrial goods, which were then sold for a juicy profit in America.
The so-called triangular trade was infamously profitable, though small in relation to total colonial Portsmouth Boston Albany Newport New London New York Philadelphia Baltimore Norfolk Charleston Savannah New Bern Proclamation Line of 1763 Ft.
Augusta Sea Industries          Fishing          Whaling Forest Industries          Lumber and timber          Shipbuilding          Naval stores General Industries          Iron works          Rum distilleries          Trading and shipping Agriculture and Trapping          Cattle and grain          Tobacco          Rice and indigo          Furs and skins The Colonial Economy By the eighteenth century, the various colonial regions had distinct economic identities.
The northern colonies grew grain and raised cattle, harvested timber and fish, and built ships.
The Chesapeake colonies and North Carolina were still heavily dependent on tobacco, whereas the southernmost colonies grew mostly rice and indigo.
Cotton, so important to the southern economy in the nineteenth century, had not yet emerged as a major crop.
commerce.
A skipper, for example, would leave a New England port with a cargo of rum and sail to the Gold Coast of Africa.
Bartering the fiery liquor with African chiefs for captured African slaves, he would proceed to the West Indies with his sobbing and suffocating cargo sardined below deck.
There he would exchange the survivors for molasses, which he would then carry to New England, where it would be distilled into rum.
He would then repeat the trip, making a handsome profit on each leg of the triangle.
Manufacturing in the colonies was of only secondary importance, although there was a surprising variety of small enterprises.
As a rule, workers could get ahead faster in soil-rich America by tilling the land.
Huge quantities of kill devil rum were distilled in Rhode Island and Massachusetts, and even some of the elect of the Lord developed an overfondness for it.
Handsome beaver hats were manufactured in quantity, despite British restrictions.
Smoking iron forges, including Pennsylvanias Valley Forge, likewise dotted the land and in fact were more numerous in 1775, though generally smaller, than those of England.
In addition, household manufacturing, including spinning and weaving by women, added up to an impressive output.
As in all pioneering countries, strong-backed laborers and skilled craftspeople were scarce and highly prized.
In early Virginia a carpenter who had committed a murder was freed because his woodworking skills were needed.
Lumbering was perhaps the most important single manufacturing activity.
Countless cartloads of virgin timber were consumed by shipbuilders, at C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 first chiefly in New England and then elsewhere in the colonies.
By 1770 about four hundred vessels of assorted sizes were splashing down the ways each year, and about one-third of the British merchant marine was American-built.
Colonial naval storessuch as tar, pitch, rosin, and turpentinewere highly valued, for Britain was anxious to gain and retain a mastery of the seas.
London offered generous bounties to stimulate production of these items; otherwise Britain would have had to turn to the uncertain and possibly hostile Baltic areas.
Towering trees, ideal as masts for His Majestys navy, were marked with the kings broad arrow for future use.
The luckless colonist who was caught cutting down this reserved timber was subject to a fine.
Even though there were countless unreserved trees and the blazed ones were being saved for the common defense, this shackle on free enterprise engendered considerable bitterness.
Americans held an important flank of a thriving, many-sided Atlantic economy by the dawn of the eighteenth century.
Yet strains appeared in this complex network as early as the 1730s.
Fast-breeding Americans demanded more and more British productsyet the slow-growing British population early reached the saturation point for absorbing imports from America.
This trade imbalance raised a question: how could the colonists sell the goods to make the money to buy what they wanted in Britain?
The answer was obvious: by seeking foreign (nonBritish) markets.
By the eve of the Revolution, the bulk of Chesapeake tobacco was filling pipes in France and in other European countries, though it passed through the hands of British re-exporters, who took a slice of the profits for themselves.
More important was the trade with the West Indies, especially the French islands.
West Indian purchases of North American timber and foodstuffs provided the crucial cash for the colonists to continue to make their own purchases in Britain.
But in 1733, bowing to pressure from influential  ment passed the Molasses Act, aimed at squelching North American trade with the  If successful, this scheme would have struck a crippling blow to American international trade and to the colonists standard of living.
American merchants responded to the act by bribing and smuggling their way around the law.
Thus was foreshadowed the impending imperial crisis, when headstrong Americans would revolt rather than submit to the dictates of the far-off Parliament, apparently bent on destroying their very livelihood.
All sprawling and sparsely populated pioneer communities are cursed with oppressive problems of transportation.
America, with a scarcity of both money and workers, was no exception.
T oba cco, fish , lu mb er, fl ou r fo r E ngl i sh tex ti l e s , e tc .
R u m S l a ve s S lav e s Tim ber, foodstuffs S ug ar , m o la s s e s ENGLAND EUROPE AFRICA NORTH AMERICAN COLONIES WEST INDIES SOUTH AMERICA Gol d Coas t Colonial Trade Patterns, c.
1770  Future president John Adams noted about this time that the commerce of the West Indies is a part of the American system of commerce.
They can neither do without us, nor we without them.
The Creator has placed us upon the globe in such a situation that we have occasion for each other.
Not until the 1700s did roads connect even the major cities, and these dirt thoroughfares were treacherously deficient.
A wayfarer could have rumbled along more rapidly over the Roman highways in the days of Julius Caesar, nearly two thousand years earlier.
It took young Benjamin Franklin nine long, rain-drenched days in 1720 to journey from Boston to Philadelphia, traveling by sailing sloop, rowboat, and foot.
News of the Declaration of Independence in 1776 reached Charleston from Philadelphia twenty-nine days after the Fourth of July.
Roads were often clouds of dust in the summer and quagmires of mud in the winter.
Stagecoach travelers braved such additional dangers as treestrewn roads, rickety bridges, carriage overturns, and runaway horses.
A traveler venturesome enough to journey from Philadelphia to New York, for example, would not think it amiss to make a will and pray with the family before departing.
Where man-made roads were wretched, heavy reliance was placed on God-grooved waterways.
Population tended to cluster along the banks of navigable rivers.
There was also much coastwise traffic, and although it was slow and undependable, it was relatively cheap and pleasant.
Taverns sprang up along the main routes of travel, as well as in the cities.
Their attractions customarily included such amusements as bowling alleys, pool tables, bars, and gambling equipment.
Before a cheerful, roaring log fire, all social classes would mingle, including the village loafers and drunks.
The tavern was yet another cradle of democracy.
Gossips also gathered at the taverns, which were clearinghouses of information, misinformation, and rumorfrequently stimulated by alcoholic refreshment and impassioned political talk.
A successful politician, like the wire-pulling Samuel Adams, was often a man who had a large alehouse fraternity in places like Bostons Green Dragon Tavern.
Taverns were important in crystallizing public opinion and proved to be hotbeds of agitation as the Revolutionary movement gathered momentum.
An intercolonial postal system was established by the mid-1700s, although private couriers remained.
Some mail was handled on credit.
Service was slow and infrequent, and secrecy was problematic.
Mail carriers, serving long routes, would sometimes pass the time by reading the letters entrusted to their care.
Two established, or tax-supported, churches were conspicuous in 1775: the Anglican and the Congregational.
A considerable segment of the population, surprisingly enough, did not worship in any church.
And in those colonies that maintained an established religion, only a minority of the people belonged to it.
The Church of England, whose members were commonly called Anglicans, became the official faith in Georgia, North and South Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, and a part of New York.
Established also in England, it served in America as a major prop of kingly authority.
British officials naturally made vigorous attempts to impose it on additional colonies, but they ran into a stone wall of opposition.
C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 In America the Anglican Church fell distressingly short of its promise.
Secure and self-satisfied, like its parent in England, it clung to a faith that was less fierce and more worldly than the religion of Puritanical New England.
Sermons were shorter; hell was less scorching; and amusements, like  Virginia fox hunting, were less scorned.
So dismal was the reputation of the Anglican clergy in  seventeenth-century Virginia that the College of William and Mary was founded in 1693 to train a better class of clerics.
The influential Congregational Church, which had grown out of the Puritan Church, was formally established in all the New England colonies, except independent-minded Rhode Island.
At first Massachusetts taxed all residents to support Congregationalism but later relented and exempted members of other well-known denominations.
Presbyterianism, though closely associated with Congregationalism, was never made official in any colonies.
Ministers of the gospel, turning from the Bible to this sinful world, increasingly grappled with burning political issues.
As the early rumblings of revolution against the British crown could be heard, sedition flowed freely from pulpits.
Presbyterianism, Congregationalism, and rebellion became a neo-trinity.
Many leading Anglican clergymen, aware of which side their tax-provided bread was buttered on, naturally supported their king.
Anglicans in the New World were seriously handicapped by not having a resident bishop, whose presence would be convenient for the ordination of young ministers.
American students of Anglican theology had to travel to England to be ordained.
On the eve of the Revolution there was serious talk of creating an American bishopric, but the scheme was violently opposed by many nonAnglicans, who feared a tightening of the royal reins.
This controversy poured holy oil on the smoldering fires of rebellion.
Religious toleration had indeed made enormous strides in America, at least when compared with its halting steps abroad.
Roman Catholics were still generally discriminated against, as in England, even in officeholding.
But there were fewer Catholics in America, and hence the anti-papist laws were less severe and less strictly enforced.
In general, people could worshipor not worshipas they pleased.
Mass.
(incl.
) 1833 Connecticut Congregational 1818 New Hampshire 1819 New York Anglican 1777 (in N.Y.
City  and three  neighboring  counties) Maryland 1777 Virginia 1786 North Carolina Anglican 1776 South Carolina 1778 Georgia 1777 Rhode Island New Jersey Delaware None Pennsylvania *Note the persistence of the Congregational establishment in New England.
Congregationalists 575,000 New England Anglicans 500,000 N.Y., South Presbyterians 410,000 Frontier German churches  (incl.
Lutheran) 200,000 Pa.
Dutch Reformed 75,000 N.Y., N.J.
Quakers 40,000 Pa., N.J., Del.
Baptists 25,000 R.I., Pa.,  N.J., Del.
Roman Catholics 25,000 Md., Pa.
Methodists 5,000 Scattered Jews 2,000 N.Y., R.I.
EST .
TOTAL MEMBERSHIP 1,857,000 EST .
TOTAL POPULATON 2,493,000 PERCENTAGE CHURCH MEMBERS 74% } } } In all the colonial churches, religion was less fervid in the early eighteenth century than it had been a century earlier, when the colonies were first planted.
The Puritan churches in particular sagged under the weight of two burdens: their elaborate theological doctrines and their compromising efforts to liberalize membership requirements.
Churchgoers increasingly complained about the dead dogs who droned out tedious, overerudite sermons from Puritan pulpits.
Some ministers, on the other hand, worried that many of their parishioners had gone soft and that their souls were no longer kindled by the hellfire of orthodox Calvinism.
Liberal ideas began to challenge the old-time religion.
Some worshipers now proclaimed that human beings were not necessarily predestined to damnation and might save themselves by good works.
Even more threatening to the Calvinist doctrine of predestination were the doctrines of the Arminians, followers of the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius, who preached that individual free will, not divine decree, determined a persons eternal fate.
Pressured by these heresies, a few churches grudgingly conceded that spiritual conversion was not necessary for church membership.
Together, these twin trends toward clerical intellectualism and lay liberalism were sapping the spiritual vitality from many denominations.
The stage was thus set for a rousing religious revival.
Known as the Great Awakening, it exploded in the 1730s and 1740s and swept through the colonies like a fire through prairie grass.
The Awakening was first ignited in Northampton, Massachusetts, by a tall, delicate, and intellectual pastor, Jonathan Edwards.
Perhaps the deepest theological mind ever nurtured in America, Edwards proclaimed with burning righteousness the folly of believing in salvation through good works and affirmed the need for complete dependence on Gods grace.
Warming to his subject, he painted in lurid detail the landscape of hell and the eternal torments of the damned.
Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God was the title of one of his most famous sermons.
He believed that hell was paved with the skulls of unbaptized children.
Edwardss preaching style was learned and closely reasoned, but his stark doctrines sparked a warmly sympathetic reaction among his parishioners in 1734.
Four years later the itinerant English C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 A good example is the best sermon.
Many have quarreled about religion that never practiced it.
Serving God is doing good to man, but praying is thought an easier service, and therefore more generally chosen.
How many observe Christs birthday; how few his precepts!
tis easier to keep holidays than commandments.
parson George Whitefield loosed a different style of evangelical preaching on America and touched off a conflagration of religious ardor that revolutionized the spiritual life of the colonies.
A former alehouse attendant, Whitefield was an orator of rare gifts.
His magnificent voice boomed sonorously over thousands of enthralled listeners in an open field.
One of Englands greatest actors of the day commented enviously that Whitefield could make audiences weep merely by pronouncing the word  could only say O!
like Mr.
Whitefield.
Triumphally touring the colonies, Whitefield trumpeted his message of human helplessness  and divine omnipotence.
His eloquence reduced Jonathan Edwards to tears and even caused the skeptical and thrifty Benjamin Franklin to empty his pockets into the collection plate.
During these roaring revival meetings, countless sinners professed conversion, and hundreds of the saved groaned, shrieked, or rolled in the snow from religious excitation.
Whitefield soon inspired American imitators.
Taking up his electrifying new style of preaching, they heaped abuse on sinners and shook enormous audiences with emotional appeals.
One preacher cackled hideously in the face of hapless wrongdoers.
Another, naked to the waist, leaped frantically about in the light of flickering torches.
Orthodox clergymen, known as old lights, were deeply skeptical of the emotionalism and the theatrical antics of the revivalists.
New light ministers, on the other hand, defended the Awakening for its role in revitalizing American religion.
Congregationalists and Presbyterians split over this issue, and many of the believers in religious conversion went over to the Baptists and other sects more prepared to make room for emotion in religion.
The Awakening left many lasting effects.
Its emphasis on direct, emotive spirituality seriously undermined the older clergy, whose authority had derived from their education and erudition.
The schisms it set off in many denominations greatly increased the numbers and the competitiveness of American churches.
It encouraged a fresh wave of missionary work among the Indians and even among black slaves, many of whom also attended the mass open-air revivals.
It led to the founding of new light centers of higher learning such as Princeton, Brown, Rutgers, and Dartmouth.
Perhaps most significant, the Great Awakening was the first spontaneous mass movement of the American people.
It tended to break down sectional boundaries as well as denominational lines and contributed to the growing sense that Americans had of themselves as a single people, united by a common history and shared experiences.
A time-honored English idea regarded education as a blessing reserved for the aristocratic few, not for the unwashed many.
Education should be for leadership, not citizenship, and primarily for males.
Only slowly and painfully did the colonists break the chains of these ancient restrictions.
Puritan New England, largely for religious reasons, was more zealously interested in education The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors you, and is dreadfully provoked.
His wrath toward you burns like fire; he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the fire.
The education of our children is never out of my mind.
I must study politics and war that my sons may have the liberty to study mathematics and philosophy.
My sons ought to study mathematics and philosophy, geography, natural history, naval architecture, navigation, commerce, and agriculture, in order to give their children a right to study painting, poetry, music, architecture, statuary, tapestry, and porcelain.
than any other section.
Dominated by the Congregational Church, it stressed the need for Bible reading by the individual worshiper.
The primary goal of the clergy was to make good Christians rather than good citizens.
A more secular approach was evident late in the eighteenth century, when some children were warned in the following verse: Education, principally for boys, flourished almost from the outset in New England.
This densely populated region boasted an impressive number of graduates from the English universities, especially Cambridge, the intellectual center of Englands Puritanism.
New Englanders, at a relatively early date, established primary and secondary schools, which varied widely in the quality of instruction and in the length of time that their doors remained open each year.
Back-straining farm labor drained much of a youths time and energy.
Fairly adequate elementary schools were also hammering knowledge into the heads of reluctant scholars in the middle colonies and in the South.
Some of these institutions were tax-supported; others were privately operated.
The South, with its white and black population diffused over wide areas, was severely handicapped by logistics in attempting to establish an effective school system.
Wealthy families leaned heavily on private tutors.
The general atmosphere in the colonial schools and colleges continued grim and gloomy.
Most of the emphasis was placed on religion and on the classical languages, Latin and Greek.
The focus was not on experiment and reason, but on doctrine and dogma.
The age was one of orthodoxy, and independence of thinking was discouraged.
Discipline was quite severe, with many a mischievous child being sadistically birched with a switch cut from a  birch tree.
Sometimes punishment was inflicted by C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 1.
Harvard Cambridge, Mass.
1636 Congregational 2.
William and Mary Williamsburg, Va.
1693 Anglican 3.
Yale New Haven, Conn.
1701 Congregational 4.
Princeton College of New Jersey Princeton, N.J.
1746 Presbyterian 5.
Pennsylvania The Academy Philadelphia, Pa.
1751 Nonsectarian 6.
Columbia Kings College New York, N.Y.
1754 Anglican 7.
Brown Rhode Island College Providence, R.I.
1764 Baptist 8.
Rutgers Queens College New Brunswick, N.J.
1766 Dutch Reformed 9.
Dartmouth (begun as Hanover, N.H.
1769 Congregational an Indian missionary  school) indentured-servant teachers, who could themselves be whipped for their failures as workers and who therefore were not inclined to spare the rod.
College education was regardedat least at  first in New Englandas more important than instruction in the ABCs.
Churches would wither if  a new crop of ministers was not trained to lead the spiritual flocks.
Many well-to-do families, especially in the South, sent their boys abroad to English institutions.
For purposes of convenience and economy, nine local colleges were established during the  colonial era.
Student enrollments were small, numbering about 200 boys at the most; and at one time a few lads as young as eleven were admitted to Harvard.
Instruction was poor by present-day standards.
The curriculum was still heavily loaded with theology and the dead languages, although by 1750 there was a distinct trend toward live languages and other modern subjects.
A significant contribution was made by Benjamin Franklin, who played a major role in launching what became the University of Pennsylvania, the first American college free from denominational control.
When it came to art and culture, colonial Americans were still in thrall to European tastes, especially British.
The simplicity of pioneering life had not yet bred many homespun patrons of the arts.
One aspiring painter, John Trumbull (17561843) of Connecticut, was discouraged in his youth by his fathers chilling remark, Connecticut is not Athens.
Like so many of his talented artistic contemporaries, Trumbull was forced to travel to London to pursue his ambitions.
Charles Willson Peale (17411827), best known for his portraits of George Washington, ran a museum, stuffed birds, and practiced dentistry.
Gifted Benjamin West (17381820) and precocious John Singleton Copley (17381815) succeeded in their ambition to become famous painters, but like Trumbull they had to go to England to complete their training.
Only abroad could they find subjects who had the leisure to sit for their portraits and the money to pay handsomely for them.
Copley was regarded as a Loyalist during the Revolutionary War, and West, a close friend of George III and official court painter, was buried in Londons St.
Pauls Cathedral.
Architecture was largely imported from the Old World and modified to meet the peculiar climatic and religious conditions of the New World.
Even the lowly log cabin was apparently borrowed from Sweden.
The red-bricked Georgian style, so common in the pre-Revolutionary decades, was introduced about 1720 and is best exemplified by the beauty of now-restored Williamsburg, Virginia.
Colonial literature, like art, was generally undistinguished, and for much the same reasons.
One noteworthy exception was the precocious poet Phillis Wheatley (c.
17531784), a slave girl brought to Boston at age eight and never formally educated.
Taken to England when twenty years of age, she published a book of verse and subsequently wrote other polished poems that revealed the influence of Alexander Pope.
Her verse compares favorably with the best of the poetry-poor colonial period, but the remarkable fact is that she could overcome her severely disadvantaged background and write any poetry at all.
Versatile Benjamin Franklin, often called the first civilized American, also shone as a literary light.
Although his autobiography is now a classic, he was best known to his contemporaries for  1758.
This famous publication, containing many pithy sayings culled from the thinkers of the ages, emphasized such homespun virtues as thrift, industry, morality, and common sense.
Examples are What maintains one vice would bring up two children; Plough deep while sluggards sleep; Honesty is the best policy; and Fish and visitors stink in three days.
Europe and was more widely read in America than anything except the Bible.
As a teacher of both old and young, Franklin had an incalculable influence in shaping the American character.
Science, rising above the shackles of superstition, was making some progress, though lagging behind the Old World.
A few botanists, mathematicians, and astronomers had won some repute, but Benjamin Franklin was perhaps the only first-rank scientist produced in the American colonies.
Franklins spectacular but dangerous experiments, including the famous kite-flying episode proving that lightning was a form of electricity, won him numerous honors in Europe.
But his mind also had a practical turn, and among his numerous inventions were bifocal spectacles and the highly efficient Franklin stove.
His lightning rod, not surprisingly, was condemned by some stodgy clergymen who felt it was presuming on God by attempting to control the artillery of the heavens.
Stump-grubbing Americans were generally too poor to buy quantities of books and too busy to read them.
A South Carolina merchant in 1744 advertised the arrival of a shipment of printed books, Pictures, Maps, and Pickles.
A few private libraries of fair size could be found, especially among the clergy.
The Byrd family of Virginia enjoyed perhaps the largest collection in the colonies, consisting of about four thousand volumes.
Bustling Benjamin Franklin established in Philadelphia the first privately supported circulating library in America; and by 1776 C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 there were about fifty public libraries and collections supported by subscription.
Hand-operated printing presses cranked out pamphlets, leaflets, and journals.
On the eve of the Revolution, there were about forty colonial newspapers, chiefly weeklies that consisted of a single large sheet folded once.
Columns ran heavily to somber essays, frequently signed with such pseudonyms as the Public Good).
The news often lagged many weeks behind the event, especially in the case of overseas happenings, in which the colonists were deeply interested.
Newspapers proved to be a powerful agency for airing colonial grievances and rallying opposition to British control.
A celebrated legal case, in 17341735, involved John Peter Zenger, a newspaper printer.
Significantly, the case arose in New York, reflecting the tumultuous give-and-take of politics in the middle colonies, where so many different ethnic groups jostled against one another.
Zengers newspaper had assailed the corrupt royal governor.
Charged with seditious libel, the accused was hauled into court, where he was defended by a former indentured servant, now a distinguished Philadelphia lawyer, Andrew Hamilton.
Zenger argued that he had printed the truth, but the bewigged royal chief justice instructed the jury not to consider the truth or falsity of Zengers statements; the mere fact of printing, irrespective of the truth, was enough to convict.
Hamilton countered that the very liberty of both exposing and opposing arbitrary power was at stake.
Swayed by his eloquence, the jurors defied the bewigged judges and daringly returned a verdict of not guilty.
Cheers burst from the spectators.
The Zenger decision was a banner achievement for freedom of the press and for the health of democracy.
It pointed the way to the kind of open public discussion required by the diverse society that colonial New York already was and that all America was to become.
Although contrary to existing law and not immediately accepted by other judges and juries, in time it helped establish the doctrine that true statements about public officials could not be prosecuted as libel.
Newspapers were thus eventually free to print responsible criticisms of powerful officials, though full freedom of the press was unknown during the pre-Revolutionary era.
American colonists may have been backward in natural or physical science, but they were making noteworthy contributions to political science.
The thirteen colonial governments took a  variety of forms.
By 1775, eight of the colonies had royal governors, who were appointed by the king.
ThreeMaryland, Pennsylvania, and Delaware were under proprietors who themselves chose the governors.
And twoConnecticut and Rhode Islandelected their own governors under selfgoverning charters.
Practically every colony utilized a two-house legislative body.
The upper house, or council, was normally appointed by the crown in the royal colonies and by the proprietor in the proprietary colonies.
It was chosen by the voters in the selfgoverning colonies.
The lower house, as the popular branch, was elected by the peopleor rather by those who owned enough property to qualify as voters.
In several of the colonies, the backcountry elements were seriously underrepresented, and they hated the ruling colonial clique perhaps more than they did kingly authority.
Legislatures, in which the people enjoyed direct representation, voted such taxes as they chose for the necessary expenses of colonial government.
Self-taxation through representation was a precious privilege that Americans had come to cherish above most others.
Governors appointed by the king were generally able men, sometimes outstanding figures.
Some, unfortunately, were incompetent or corrupt broken-down politicians badly in need of jobs.
The The question before the court and you, gentlemen of the jury, is not of small nor private concern.
It is not the cause of a poor printer, nor of New York alone, which you are now trying.
It may, in its consequence, affect every freeman that lives under a British government on the main [land] of America.
It is the best cause.
It is the cause of liberty.
worst of the group was probably impoverished Lord Cornbury, first cousin of Queen Anne, who was made governor of New York and New Jersey in 1702.
He proved to be a drunkard, a spendthrift, a grafter, an embezzler, a religious bigot, and a vain fool, who was accused (probably inaccurately) of dressing like a woman.
Even the best appointees had trouble with the colonial legislatures, basically because the royal governor embodied a bothersome transatlantic authority some three thousand miles away.
The colonial assemblies found various ways to assert their authority and independence.
Some of them employed the trick of withholding the governors salary unless he yielded to their wishes.
He was normally in need of moneyotherwise he would not have come to this godforsaken countryso the power of the purse usually forced him to terms.
But one governor of North Carolina died with his salary eleven years in arrears.
The London government, in leaving the colonial governor to the tender mercies of the legislature, was guilty of poor administration.
In the interests of simple efficiency, the British authorities should have arranged to pay him from independent sources.
As events turned out, control over the purse by the colonial legislatures led to prolonged bickering, which proved to be one of the persistent irritants that generated a spirit of revolt.
* Administration at the local level was also varied.
County government remained the rule in the plantation South; town-meeting government predominated in New England; and a modification of the two developed in the middle colonies.
In the town meeting, with its open discussion and open voting, direct democracy functioned at its best.
In this unrivaled cradle of self-government, Americans learned to cherish their privileges and exercise their duties as citizens of the New World commonwealths.
Yet the ballot was by no means a birthright.
Religious or property qualifications for voting, with even stiffer qualifications for officeholding, existed in all the colonies in 1775.
The privileged upper classes, fearful of democratic excesses, were unwilling to grant the ballot to every biped of the forest.
Perhaps half of the adult white males were thus disfranchised.
But because of the ease of acquiring land and thus satisfying property requirements, the right to vote was not beyond the reach of most industrious and enterprising colonists.
Yet somewhat surprisingly, eligible voters often did not exercise this precious privilege.
They frequently acquiesced in the leadership of their betters, who ran colonial affairsthough always reserving the right to vote misbehaving rascals out of office.
By 1775 America was not yet a true democracy socially, economically, or politically.
But it was far more democratic than England and the European continent.
Colonial institutions were giving freer rein to the democratic ideals of tolerance, educational advantages, equality of economic opportunity, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and representative government.
And these democratic seeds, planted in rich soil, were to bring forth a lush harvest in later years.
Everyday life in the colonies may now seem glamorous, especially as reflected in antique shops.
But judged by modern standards, it was drab and tedious.
For most people the labor was heavy and constantfrom can see to cant see.
Food was plentiful, though the diet could be coarse and monotonous.
Americans probably ate more bountifully, especially of meat, than any people in the Old World.
Lazy or sickly was the person whose stomach was empty.
Basic comforts now taken for granted were lacking.
Churches were not heated at all, except for charcoal foot-warmers that the women carried.
During the frigid New England winters, the preaching of hellfire may not have seemed altogether unattractive.
Drafty homes were poorly heated, chiefly by inefficient fireplaces.
There was no running C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 It was not Virginia that wanted a governor but a court favorite that wanted a salary.
*Parliament finally arranged for separate payment of the  governors through the Townshend taxes of 1767, but by then the colonists were in such an ugly mood over taxation that  this innovation only added fresh fuel to the flames.
water in the houses, no plumbing, and probably not a single bathtub in all colonial America.
Candles and whale-oil lamps provided faint and flickering illumination.
Garbage disposal was primitive.
Longsnouted hogs customarily ranged the streets to consume refuse, while buzzards, protected by law, flapped greedily over tidbits of waste.
Amusement was eagerly pursued where time and custom permitted.
The militia assembled periodically for musters, which consisted of several days of drilling, liberally interspersed with merrymaking and flirting.
On the frontier, pleasure was often combined with work at house-raisings, quilting bees, husking bees, and apple parings.
Funerals and weddings everywhere afforded opportunities for social gatherings, which customarily involved the swilling of much strong liquor.
Winter sports were common in the North, whereas in the South card playing, horse racing, cockfighting, and fox hunting were favorite pastimes.
George Washington, not surprisingly, was a superb rider.
In the nonpuritanical South, dancing was the ragejigs, square dances, the Virginia reeland the agile Washington could swing his fair partner with the best of them.
Other diversions beckoned.
Lotteries were universally approved, even by the clergy, and were used to raise money for churches and colleges, including Harvard.
Stage plays became popular in the South but were frowned upon in Quaker and Puritan colonies and in some places forbidden by law.
Many of the New England clergy saw playacting as timeconsuming and immoral; they preferred religious lectures, from which their flocks derived much spiritual satisfaction.
Holidays were everywhere celebrated in the American colonies, but Christmas was frowned upon in New England as an offensive reminder of Popery.
Yuletide is fooltide was a common Puritan sneer.
Thanksgiving Day came to be a truly American festival, for it combined thanks to God with an opportunity for jollification, gorging, and guzzling.
By the mid-eighteenth century, Britains several North American colonies, despite their differences, revealed some striking similarities.
All were basically English in language and customs, and Protestant in religion, while the widespread presence of other peoples and faiths compelled every colony to cede at least some degree of ethnic and religious toleration.
Compared with contemporary Europe, they all afforded to enterprising individuals unusual opportunities for social mobility.
They all possessed some measure of self-government, though by no means complete democracy.
Communication and transportation among the colonies were improving.
British North America by 1775 looked like a patchwork quilteach part slightly different, but stitched together by common origins, common ways of life, and common beliefs in toleration, economic development, and, above all, self-rule.
Fatefully, all the colonies were also separated from the seat of imperial authority by a vast ocean moat some three thousand miles wide.
These simple facts of shared history, culture, and geography set the stage for the colonists struggle to unite as an independent people.
College of William and Mary founded Yale College founded Smallpox inoculation introduced First edition of Franklins  Jonathan Edwards begins Great Awakening Zenger free-press trial in New York George Whitefield spreads Great Awakening Princeton College founded Britain vetoes South Carolina antislave trade measures Paxton Boys march on Philadelphia Brown College founded Rutgers College founded Regulator protests Dartmouth College founded C HAPTER 5 Colonial Society on the Eve of Revolution, 17001775 he earliest historians of colonial society portrayed close-knit, homogeneous, and hierarchical communities.
Richard Bushmans  when he described colonial New England as an expanding, opening society.
In this view the colonists gradually lost the religious discipline and social structure of the founding generations, as they poured out onto the frontier or sailed the seas in search of fortune and adventure.
Rhys Isaac viewed the Great Awakening in the South as similar evidence of erosion in the social constraints and deference that once held colonial society together.
Unbridled religious enthusiasm, North and South, directed by itinerant preachers, encouraged the sort of quest for personal autonomy that eventually led Americans to demand national independence.
Other scholars have focused on the negative aspects of this alleged breakdown in the traditional order, particularly on the rise of new social inequalities.
Social historians like Kenneth Lockridge have argued that the decline of cohesive communities, population pressure on the land, and continued dominance of church and parental authority gave rise to a landless class, forced to till tenant plots in the countryside or find work as manual laborers in the cities.
Gary Nash, in  traced the rise of a competitive, individualistic social order in colonial cities, marking the end of the patronage and paternalism that had once bound communities together.
Increasingly, Nash contended, class antagonisms split communities.
The wealthy abandoned their traditional obligations toward the poor for more selfish capitalistic social relations that favored their class peers.
The consequent politicization of the laboring classes helped motivate their participation in the American Revolution.
Some scholars have disputed that declension undermined colonial communities.
Christine Heyrman, in particular, has argued in  has been overstated; religious beliefs and commercial activities coexisted throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
Similarly, Jack Greene has recently suggested that the obsession with the decline of deference has obscured the fact that colonies outside of New England, like Virginia and Maryland, actually experienced a consolidation of religious and social authority throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, becoming more hierarchical and paternalistic.
Like Greene, many historians have focused on sectional differences between the colonies, and the peculiar nature of social equality and inequality in each.
Much of the impetus for this inquiry stems from an issue that has long perplexed students of early America: the simultaneous evolution of a rigid racial caste system alongside democratic political institutions.
Decades ago, when most historians came from Yankee stock, they resolved the apparent paradox by locating the seeds of democracy in New England.
The aggressive independence of the people, best expressed by the boisterous town meetings, spawned the American obsession with freedom.
On the other hand, this view holds, the slave societies of the South were hierarchical, aristocratic communities under the sway of a few powerful planters.
More recently, some historians have attacked this simple dichotomy, noting many undemocratic features in colonial New England and arguing that while the South may have been the site of tremendous inequality, it also produced most of the founding fathers.
Washington, Jefferson, and Madison the architects of American government with its foundation in libertyall hailed from slaveholding Virginia.
In fact, nowhere were republican principles stronger than in Virginia.
Some scholars, notably Edmund S. Morgan in  of wealthy planters to concede the equality and freedom of all white males a device to ensure racial solidarity and to mute class conflict.
In this view the concurrent emergence of slavery and democracy was no paradox.
White racial solidarity muffled animosity between rich and poor and fostered the devotion to equality among whites that became a hallmark of American democracy.
Few historians still argue that the colonies offered boundless opportunities for inhabitants, white or black.
But scholars disagree vigorously over what kinds of inequalities and social tensions most shaped eighteenth-century society and contributed to the revolutionary agitation that eventually consumedand transformedcolonial America.
Even so, whether one accepts Morgans argument that Americans bought their independence with slave labor, or those interpretations that point to rising social conflict between whites as the salient characteristic of colonial society on the eve of the Revolution, the once-common assumption that America was a world of equality and consensus no longer reigns undisputed.
Yet because ones life chances were still unquestionably better in America than Europe, immigrants continued to pour in, imbued with high expectations about America as a land of opportunity.
For further reading, see page A3 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Duel for  North America  16081763 V OLTAIRE ,  C .
1756 A s the seventeenth century neared its sunset, a titanic struggle was shaping up for mastery of the North American continent.
The contest involved three Old World NationsBritain,* France, and Spainand it unavoidably swept up Native American peoples as well.
From 1688 to 1763, four bitter wars convulsed Europe.
All four of those conflicts were world wars.
They amounted to a death struggle for domination in Europe as well as in the New World, and they were fought on the waters and soil of two hemispheres.
Counting these first four clashes, nine world wars have been waged since 1688.
The American people, whether as British subjects or as American citizens, proved unable to stay out of a single one of them.
And one of those wars known as the Seven Years War in Europe and the French and Indian War in Americaset the stage for Americas independence.
Like England and Holland, France was a latecomer in the scramble for New World real estate, and  for basically the same reasons.
It was convulsed during the 1500s by foreign wars and domestic strife, including the frightful clashes between the Roman Catholics and the Protestant Huguenots.
On St.
Bartholomews Day, 1572, over ten thousand Huguenotsmen, women, and childrenwere butchered in cold blood.
*After the union of England and Scotland in 1707, Great Britain became the nations official name.
A new era dawned in 1598 when the Edict of Nantes, issued by the crown, granted limited toleration to French Protestants.
Religious wars ceased, and in the new century France blossomed into the mightiest and most feared nation in Europe, led by a series of brilliant ministers and by the vainglorious King Louis XIV.
Enthroned as a five-year-old boy, he reigned for no less than seventy-two years (16431715), surrounded by a glittering court and fluttering mistresses.
Fatefully for North America, Louis XIV also took a deep interest in overseas colonies.
Success finally rewarded the exertions of France in the New World, after rocky beginnings.
In 1608, the year after Jamestown, the permanent beginnings of a vast empire were established at Quebec, a granite sentinel commanding the St.
Lawrence River.
The leading figure was Samuel de Champlain, an intrepid soldier and explorer whose energy and leadership fairly earned him the title Father of New France.
Champlain entered into friendly relationsa fateful friendshipwith the nearby Huron Indian tribes.
At their request, he joined them in battle against their foes, the federated Iroquois tribes of the upper New York area.
Two volleys from the lightning sticks of the whites routed the terrified Iroquois, who left behind three dead and one wounded.
France, to its sorrow, thus earned the lasting enmity of the Iroquois tribes.
They thereafter hampered French penetration of the Ohio Valley, sometimes ravaging French settlements and frequently serving as allies of the British in the prolonged struggle for supremacy on the continent.
The government of New France (Canada) finally fell under the direct control of the king after various commercial companies had faltered or failed.
This royal regime was almost completely autocratic.
The people elected no representative assemblies, nor did they enjoy the right to trial by jury, as in the English colonies.
Population in Catholic New France grew at a listless pace.
As late as 1750, only sixty thousand or so whites inhabited New France.
Landowning French peasants, unlike the dispossessed English tenant Frances American Empire at Its Greatest Extent, 1700 farmers who embarked for the British colonies,  had little economic motive to move.
Protestant Huguenots, who might have had a religious motive to migrate, were denied a refuge in this raw colony.
The French government, in any case, favored its Caribbean island colonies, rich in sugar and rum, over the snow-cloaked wilderness of Canada.
New France did contain one valuable resource: the beaver.
European fashion-setters valued beaver-pelt hats for their warmth and opulent appearance.
To adorn the heads of Europeans, French fur-trappers ranged over the woods and waterways of North America in pursuit of beaver.
These colorful runners of riskstwo-fisted drinkers, free spenders, free livers and lovers.
They littered the land with scores of place names, including Baton Rouge (red stick), Terre Haute (high land), Des Moines (some monks), and Grand Teton (big breast).
Singing, paddle-swinging French  recruited Indians into the fur business.
The Indian fur flotilla arriving in Montreal in 1693 numbered four hundred canoes.
But the fur trade had some disastrous drawbacks.
Indians recruited into the fur business were decimated by the white mans disC HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 French trading posts (16041760)   Hudson's Bay Company (16701869) Monteal-based fur trade (17631784) North West Company (17841821) Spain and New Mexico (15981821) Fur-Trading Posts To serve the needs of European fashion, fur-traders pursued the beaver for more than two centuries over the entire continent of North America.
They brought many Indians for the first time into contact with white culture.
eases and debauched by his alcohol.
Slaughtering beaver by the boatload also violated many Indians religious beliefs and sadly demonstrated the shattering effect that contact with Europeans wreaked on traditional Indian ways of life.
Pursuing the sharp-toothed beaver ever deeper into the heart of the continent, the French trappers and their Indian partners hiked, rode, snowshoed, sailed, and paddled across amazing distances.
They trekked in a huge arc across the Great Lakes, into present-day Saskatchewan and Manitoba; along the valleys of the Platte, the Arkansas, and the Missouri; west to the Rockies; and south to the border of Spanish Texas (see map at left).
In the process they all but extinguished the beaver population in many areas, inflicting incalculable ecological damage.
French Catholic missionaries, notably the Jesuits, labored zealously to save the Indians for Christ and from the fur-trappers.
Some of the Jesuit missionaries, their efforts scorned, suffered unspeakable tortures at the hands of the Indians.
But though they made few permanent converts, the Jesuits played a vital role as explorers and geographers.
Other explorers sought neither souls nor fur, but empire.
To thwart English settlers pushing into the Ohio Valley, Antoine Cadillac founded Detroit, the City of Straits, in 1701.
To check Spanish penetration into the region of the Gulf of Mexico, ambitious Robert de La Salle floated down the Mississippi in 1682 to the point where it mingles with the Gulf.
He named the great interior basin Louisiana, in honor of his sovereign, Louis XIV.
Dreaming of empire, he returned to the Gulf three years later with a colonizing expedition of four ships.
But he failed to find the Mississippi delta, landed in Spanish Texas, and in 1687 was murdered by his mutinous men.
Undismayed, French officials persisted in their efforts to block Spain on the Gulf of Mexico.
They planted several fortified posts in what is now Mississippi and Louisiana, the most important of which was New Orleans (1718).
Commanding the mouth of the Mississippi River, this strategic semitropical outpost also tapped the fur trade of the huge interior valley.
The fertile Illinois countrywhere the French established forts and trading posts at Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennesbecame the garden of Frances North American empire.
Surprising amounts of grain were floated down the Mississippi for transshipment to the West Indies and to Europe.
The earliest contests among the European powers for control of North America, known to the British colonists as King Williams War (16891697) and Queen Annes War (17021713), mostly pitted British colonists against the French  both sides recruiting whatever Indian allies they could.
Neither France nor Britain at this stage considered America worth the commitment of large detachments of regular troops, so the combatants waged a kind of primitive guerrilla warfare.
Indian allies of the French ravaged with torch and tomahawk the British colonial frontiers, visiting especially bloody violence on the villages of Schenectady, New York, and Deerfield, Massachusetts (see the top map on p.
112).
Spain, eventually allied with France, probed from its Florida base at outlying South Carolina settlements.
For their part the British colonists failed miserably in sallies against Quebec and Montreal but scored a signal victory when they temporarily seized the stronghold of Port Royal in Acadia (present-day Nova Scotia).
Peace terms, signed at Utrecht in 1713, revealed how badly France and its Spanish ally had been beaten.
Britain was rewarded with Frenchpopulated Acadia (which the British renamed Nova Scotia, or New Scotland) and the wintry wastes of Newfoundland and Hudson Bay.
These immense tracts pinched the St.
Lawrence settlements of France, foreshadowing their ultimate doom.
A generation of peace ensued, during which Britain provided its American colonies with decades of salutary neglectfertile soil for the roots of independence.
By the treaty of 1713, the British also won limited trading rights in Spanish America, but these later involved much friction over smuggling.
Ill feeling flared up when the British captain Jenkins, encountering Spanish revenue authorities, had one ear C HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 William III, 16891702 Collapse of Dominion of New England; King Williams War Anne, 17021714 Queen Annes War, 17021713 George I, 17141727 Navigation Laws laxly enforced (salutary neglect) George II, 17271760 Ga.
founded; King Georges War; French and Indian War George III, 17601820 American Revolution, 17751783 *See pp.
29, 53 for earlier ones.
British Territory After Two Wars, 1713 sliced off by a sword.
The Spanish commander reportedly sneered, Carry this home to the King, your master, whom, if he were present, I would serve in like fashion.
The victim, with a tale of woe on his tongue and a shriveled ear in his hand, aroused furious resentment when he returned home to Britain.
The War of Jenkinss Ear, curiously but aptly named, broke out in 1739 between the British and the Spaniards.
It was confined to the Caribbean Sea and to the much-buffeted buffer colony of Georgia, where philanthropist-soldier James Oglethorpe fought his Spanish foe to a standstill.
This small-scale scuffle with Spain in America soon merged with the large-scale War of Austrian Succession in Europe, and came to be called King Georges War in America.
Once again, France allied itself with Spain.
And once again, a rustic force of New Englanders invaded New France.
With help 16881697 War of the League of Augsburg King Williams War, 16891697 17011713 War of Spanish Succession Queen Annes War, 17021713 17401748 War of Austrian Succession King Georges War, 17441748 17561763 Seven Years War French and Indian War, 17541763 17781783 War of the American Revolution American Revolution, 17751783 17931802 Wars of the French Revolution Undeclared French War, 17981800 18031815 Napoleonic Wars War of 1812, 18121814 19141918 World War I World War I, 19171918 19391945 World War II World War II, 19411945 from a British fleet and with a great deal of good luck, the raw and sometimes drunken recruits captured the reputedly impregnable French fortress of Louisbourg, which was on Cape Breton Island and commanded the approaches to the St.
Lawrence River (see map above).
When the peace treaty of 1748 handed Louisbourg back to their French foe, the victorious New Englanders were outraged.
The glory of their arms never terribly lustrous in any eventseemed tarnished by the wiles of Old World diplomats.
Worse, Louisbourg was still a cocked pistol pointed at the heart of the American continent.
France, powerful and unappeased, still clung to its vast holdings in North America.
As the dogfight intensified in the New World, the Ohio Valley became the chief bone of contention between the French and British.
The Ohio country was the critical area into which the westwardpushing British colonists would inevitably penetrate.
For France it was also the key to the continent that the French had to retain, particularly if they were going to link their Canadian holdings with those of the lower Mississippi Valley.
By the mid1700s, the British colonists, painfully aware of these basic truths, were no longer so reluctant to bear  the burdens of empire.
Alarmed by French landgrabbing and cutthroat fur-trade competition in the Ohio Valley, they were determined to fight for their economic security and for the supremacy of their way of life in North America.
Rivalry for the lush lands of the upper Ohio Valley brought tensions to the snapping point.
In 1749 a group of British colonial speculators, chiefly influential Virginians, including the Washington family, had secured shaky legal rights to some 500,000 acres in this region.
In the same disputed wilderness, the C HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 (captured 1745) Louisbourg Quebec Port Royal Montreal Deerfield (1704) Albany Boston New York Schenectady (1690) Cape Breton Island Scenes of the French Wars The arrows indicate French-Indian attacks.
Schenectady was burned to the ground in the raid of 1690.
At Deerfield, site of one of the New England frontiers bloodiest confrontations, invaders killed fifty inhabitants and sent over a hundred others fleeing for their lives into the winter wilderness.
The Indian attackers also took over one hundred Deerfield residents captive, including the child Titus King.
He later wrote, Captivity is an awful school for children, when we see how quick they will fall in with the Indian ways.
Nothing seems to be more taking [appealing].
In six months time they forsake father and mother, forget their own land, refuse to speak their own tongue, and seemingly be wholly swallowed up with the Indians.
(French) (French) (Pittsburgh) (French) (Washington's defeat) (British) (French) Fort Presque Isle Fort Le Boeuf Fort Duquesne Fort Necessity Fort Venango P E N N S Y L V A N I A M D .
V A .
N E W   Y O R K Washingtons route 17531754 The Ohio Country, 17531754 French were in the process of erecting a chain of forts commanding the strategic Ohio River.
Especially formidable was Fort Duquesne at the pivotal point where the Monongahela and Allegheny Rivers join to form the Ohiothe later site of Pittsburgh.
In 1754 the governor of Virginia ushered George Washington, a twenty-one-year-old surveyor and fellow Virginian, onto the stage of history.
To secure the Virginians claims, Washington was sent to the Ohio country as a lieutenant colonel in command of about 150 Virginia militiamen.
Encountering a small detachment of French troops in the forest about forty miles from Fort Duquesne, the Virginians  fired the first shots of the globe-girdling new war.
The French leader was killed, and his men retreated.
An exultant Washington wrote, I heard the bullets whistle, and believe me, there is something charming in the sound.
It soon lost its charm.
The French promptly returned with reinforcements, who surrounded Washington in his hastily constructed breastworks, Fort Necessity.
After a tenhour siege, he was forced to surrender his entire command in July 1754ironically the fourth of July.
But he was permitted to march his men away with the full honors of war.
With the shooting already started and in danger of spreading, the British authorities in Nova Scotia took vigorous action.
Understandably fearing a stab in the back from the French Acadians, whom Britain had acquired in 1713, the British brutally uprooted some four thousand of them in 1755.
These unhappy French deportees were scattered as far south as Louisiana, where the descendants of the French-speaking Acadians are now called Cajuns and number nearly a million.
The first three Anglo-French colonial wars had all started in Europe, but the tables were now reversed.
The fourth struggle, known as the French and Indian War, began in America.
Touched off by George Washington in the wilds of the Ohio Valley in 1754, it rocked along on an undeclared basis for two years and then widened into the most far-flung conflict the world had yet seenthe Seven Years War.
It was fought not only in America but in Europe, in the West Indies, in the Philippines, in Africa, and on the ocean.
The Seven Years War was a seven-seas war.
In Europe the principal adversaries were Britain and Prussia on one side, arrayed against France, Spain, Austria, and Russia on the other.
The bloodiest theater was in Germany, where Frederick the Great deservedly won the title of Great by repelling French, Austrian, and Russian armies, often with the opposing forces outnumbering his own three to one.
The London government, unable to send him effective troop reinforcements, liberally subsidized him with gold.
Luckily for the British colonists, the French wasted so much strength in this European bloodbath that they were unable to throw an adequate force into the New World.
America was conquered in Germany, declared Britains great statesman William Pitt.
In previous colonial clashes, the Americans had revealed an astonishing lack of unity.
Colonists who were nearest the shooting had responded much more generously with volunteers and money than those enjoying the safety of remoteness.
Even the Indians had laughed at the inability of the colonists to pull together.
Now, with musketballs already splitting the air in Ohio, the crisis demanded concerted action.
In 1754 the British government summoned an intercolonial congress to Albany, New York, near the Iroquois Indian country.
Travel-weary delegates from only seven of the thirteen colonies showed up.
The immediate purpose was to keep the scalping knives of the Iroquois tribes loyal to the British in the spreading war.
The chiefs were harangued at length and then presented with thirty wagonloads of gifts, including guns.
The longer-range purpose at Albany was to achieve greater colonial unity and thus bolster the common defense against France.
A month before the congress assembled, ingenious Benjamin Franklin published in his  most famous cartoon of the colonial era.
Showing the separate colonies as parts of a disjointed snake, it broadcast the slogan Join, or Die.
Franklin himself, a wise and witty counselor, was the leading spirit of the Albany Congress.
His outstanding contribution was a well-devised  but premature scheme for colonial home rule.
The Albany delegates unanimously adopted the plan, but the individual colonies spurned it, as did the London regime.
To the colonists, it did not seem to give enough independence; to the British officials, it seemed to give too much.
The disappointing result confirmed one of Franklins sage observations: all people agreed on the need for union, but their weak noddles were perfectly distracted when they attempted to agree on details.
The opening clashes of the French and Indian War went badly for the British colonists.
Haughty and bullheaded General Braddock, a sixty-year-old officer experienced in European warfare, was sent to Virginia with a strong detachment of British regulars.
After foraging scanty supplies from the reluctant colonists, he set out in 1755 with some two thousand men to capture Fort Duquesne.
A considerable part of his force consisted of ill-disciplined colonial militiamen (buckskins), whose behindthe-tree methods of fighting Indians won Bulldog Braddocks professional contempt.
Braddocks expedition, dragging heavy artillery, moved slowly.
Axmen laboriously hacked a path through the dense forest, thus opening a road that was later to be an important artery to the West.
A few miles from Fort Duquesne, Braddock encounC HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 tered a much smaller French and Indian army.
At first the enemy force was repulsed, but it quickly melted into the thickets and poured a murderous fire into the ranks of the redcoats.
In the ensuing debate, George Washington, an energetic and fearless aide to Braddock, had two horses shot from under him and four bullets pierced his coat, and Braddock himself was mortally wounded.
The entire British force was routed after appalling losses.
Inflamed by this easy victory, the Indians took to a wider warpath.
The whole frontier from Pennsylvania to North Carolina, left virtually naked by Braddocks bloody defeat, felt their fury.
Scalping forays occurred within eighty miles of Philadelphia, and in desperation the local authorities offered bounties for Indian scalps: $50 for a womans and $130 for a warriors.
George Washington, with only three hundred men, tried desperately to defend the scorched frontier.
The British launched a full-scale invasion of Canada in 1756, now that the undeclared war in America had at last merged into a world conflict.
But they unwisely tried to attack a number of exposed wilderness posts simultaneously, instead of throwing all their strength at Quebec and Montreal.
If these strongholds had fallen, all the outposts to the west would have withered  for lack of riverborne supplies.
But the British ignored such sound strategy, and defeat after defeat tarnished their arms, both in America and in Europe.
In the hour of crisis, Britain brought forth, as it repeatedly has, a superlative leaderWilliam Pitt.
A tall and imposing figure, whose flashing eyes were set in a hawklike face, he was popularly known as the Great Commoner.
Pitt drew much of his strength from the common people, who admired him so greatly that on occasion they kissed his horses.
A splendid orator endowed with a majestic voice, he believed passionately in his cause, in his country, and in himself.
In 1757 Pitt became a foremost leader in the London government.
Throwing himself headlong into his task, he soon earned the title Organizer of Victory.
He wisely decided to soft-pedal assaults on the French West Indies, which had been bleeding away much British strength, and to concentrate on the vitals of Canadathe Quebec-Montreal area.
He also picked young and energetic leaders, thus bypassing incompetent and cautious old generals.
Pitt first dispatched a powerful expedition in 1758 against Louisbourg.
The frowning fortress, though it had been greatly strengthened, fell after a blistering siege.
Wild rejoicing swept Britain, for this was the first significant British victory of the entire war.
Quebec was next on Pitts list.
For this crucial expedition, he chose the thirty-two-year-old James (British capture, 1759) (British capture, 1759) (Acadians expelled 1755) (British capture, 1758) Fort Niagara Crown Point Fort Ticonderoga (British capture, 1759) Louisbourg (1758) Fort Duquesne Quebec (1759) Montreal (1760) NOVA SCOTIA Events of 17551760 Wolfe, who had been an officer since the age of fourteen.
Though slight and sickly, Wolfe combined a mixture of dash with painstaking attention to detail.
The British attackers were making woeful progress when Wolfe, in a daring night move, sent a detachment up a poorly guarded part of the rocky eminence protecting Quebec.
This vanguard scaled the cliff, pulling itself upward by the bushes and showing the way for the others.
In the morning the two armies faced each other on the Plains of Abraham on the outskirts of Quebec,  the British under Wolfe and the French under the Marquis de Montcalm.
Both commanders fell fatally wounded, but the French were defeated and the city surrendered (see Makers of America: The French, pp.
118119).
The Battle of Quebec in 1759 ranks as one of the most significant engagements in British and American history.
When Montreal fell in 1760, the French flag had fluttered in Canada for the last time.
By the peace settlement at Paris (1763), French power was thrown completely off the continent of North America, leaving behind a fertile French population that is to this day a strong minority in Canada.
This bitter pill was sweetened somewhat when the French were allowed to retain several small but valuable sugar islands in the West Indies, and two never-tobe-fortified islets in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence for fishing stations.
A final blow came when the French, to compensate their luckless Spanish ally for its losses, ceded to Spain all trans-Mississippi Louisiana, plus the outlet of New Orleans.
Spain, for its part, turned Florida over to Britain in return for Cuba, where Havana had fallen to British arms.
Great Britain thus emerged as the dominant power in North America, while taking its place as the leading naval power of the world.
Britains colonists, baptized by fire, emerged with increased confidence in their military strength.
They had borne the brunt of battle at first; they had fought bravely alongside the crack British regulars; and they had gained valuable experience, officers C HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 North America Before 1754 North America After 1763 (after French losses) and men alike.
In the closing days of the conflict, some twenty thousand American recruits were under arms.
The French and Indian War, while bolstering colonial self-esteem, simultaneously shattered the myth of British invincibility.
On Braddocks bloody field, the buckskin militia had seen the demoralized regulars huddling helplessly together or fleeing their unseen enemy.
Ominously, friction had developed during the war between arrogant British officers and the raw colonial boors.
Displaying the contempt of the professional soldier for amateurs, the British refused to recognize any American militia commission above the rank of captaina demotion humiliating to Colonel George Washington.
They also showed the usual condescension of snobs from the civilized Old Country toward the scum who had confessed failure by fleeing to the outhouses of civilization.
General Wolfe referred to the colonial militia, with exaggeration, as in general the dirtiest, most contemptible, cowardly dogs that you can conceive.
Energetic and hard-working American settlers, in contrast, believed themselves to be the cutting edge of British civilization.
They felt that they deserved credit rather than contempt for risking their lives to secure a New World empire.
British officials were further distressed by the reluctance of the colonists to support the common cause wholeheartedly.
American shippers, using fraudulent papers, developed a golden traffic with the enemy ports of the Spanish and French West Indies.
This treasonable trade in foodstuffs actually kept some of the hostile islands from starving at the very time when the British navy was trying to subdue them.
In the final year of the war, the British authorities, forced to resort to drastic measures, forbade the export of all supplies from New England and the middle colonies.
Other colonists, self-centered and alienated by distance from the war, refused to provide troops and money for the conflict.
They demanded the rights and privileges of Englishmen, without the duties and responsibilities of Englishmen.
Not until Pitt had offered to reimburse the colonies for a substantial part of their expendituressome 900,000did they move with some enthusiasm.
If the Americans had to be bribed to defend themselves against a relentless and savage foe, would they ever unite to strike the mother country?
The curse of intercolonial disunity, present from early days, had continued throughout the recent hostilities.
It had been caused mainly by enormous distances; by geographical barriers like rivers; by conflicting religions, from Catholic to Quaker; by varied nationalities, from German to Irish; by differing types of colonial governments; by many boundary disputes; and by the resentment of the crude backcountry settlers against the aristocratic bigwigs.
Yet unity received some encouragement during the French and Indian War.
When soldiers and statesmen from widely separated colonies met around common campfires and council tables, they were often agreeably surprised by what they found.
Despite deep-seated jealousy and suspicion, they discovered that they were all fellow Americans who generally spoke the same language and shared common ideals.
Barriers of disunity began to melt, although a long and rugged road lay ahead before a coherent nation would emerge.
The removal of the French menace in Canada profoundly affected American attitudes.
While the French hawk had been hovering in the North and West, the colonial chicks had been forced to cling .
for fire and water are not more heterogeneous than the different colonies in North America.
Nothing can exceed the jealousy and emulation which they possess in regard to each other.
in short .
were they left to themselves there would soon be a civil war from one end of the continent to the other, while the Indians and Negros would .
impatiently watch the opportunity of exterminating them all together.
t the height of his reign in the late seventeenth century, Louis XIV, Frances Sun King, turned his covetous eyes westward to the New World.
He envisioned there a bountiful New France, settled  by civilizing French pioneers, in the maritime provinces of Acadia and the icy expanses of Quebec.
But his dreams flickered out like candles before the British juggernaut in the eighteenth century, and his former New World subjects had to suffer foreign governance in the aftermath of the French defeats in 1713 and 1763.
Over the course of two centuries, many chafed under the British yoke and eventually found their way to the United States.
The first French to leave Canada were the Acadians, the settlers of the seaboard region that now comprises Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and part of Maine.
In 1713 the French crown ceded this territory to the British, who demanded that the Acadians either swear allegiance to Britain or withdraw to French territory.
At first doing neither, they managed to escape reprisals until   ment) in 1755, when the British expelled them from the region at bayonet point.
The Acadians fled far south to the French colony of Louisiana, where they settled among the sleepy bayous, planted sugar cane and sweet potatoes, practiced Roman Catholicism, and spoke the French dialect that came to  be called Cajun (a corruption of the English word secluded, many of them accessible only by small boat.
For generations these insular people were scarcely influenced by developments outside their tight-knit communities.
Louisiana passed through Spanish, French, and American hands, but the Cajuns kept to themselves.
Cajun women sometimes married German, English, or Spanish men today one finds such names as Schneider and Lopez in the bayousbut the outsiders were always absorbed completely into the large Cajun families.
Not until the twentieth century did Cajun parents surrender their children to public schools and submit to a state law restricting French speech.
Only in the 1930s, with a bridge-building spree engineered by Governor Huey Long, was the isolation of these bayou communities broken.
In 1763, as the French settlers of Quebec fell under British rule, a second group of French people began to leave Canada.
By 1840 what had been an irregular southward trickle of Quebecois swelled to a steady stream, depositing most of the migrating French-Canadians in New England.
These nineteenth-century emigrants were not goaded by  bayonets but driven away by the lean harvests yielded by Quebecs short growing season and scarcity of arable land.
They frequently recrossed the border to visit their old homes, availing themselves of the train routes opened in the 1840s between Quebec and Boston.
Most hoped someday to return to Canada for good.
They emigrated mostly to work in New Englands lumberyards and textile mills, gradually establishing permanent settlements in the northern woods.
Like the Acadians, these later migrants from Quebec stubbornly preserved their Roman Catholicism.
And both groups shared a passionate love of their French language, believing it to be the cement that bound them, their religion, and their culture together.
As one French-Canadian explained, Let us worship in peace and in our own tongue.
All else may disappear but this must remain our badge.
Yet today almost all Cajuns and New England FrenchCanadians speak English.
North of the border, in the land that these immigrants left behind, Louis XIVs dream of implanting a French civilization in the New World lingers on in the Canadian province of Quebec.
Centuries have passed since the British won the great eighteenthcentury duel for North America, but the French language still adorns the road signs of Quebec and rings out in its classrooms, courts, and markets, eloquently testifying to the continued vitality of French culture in North America.
close to the wings of their British mother hen.
Now that the hawk was killed, they could range far afield with a new spirit of independence.
The French, humiliated by the British and saddened by the fate of Canada, consoled themselves with one wishful thought.
Perhaps the loss of their American empire would one day result in Britains loss of its American empire.
In a sense the history of the United States began with the fall of Quebec and Montreal; the infant republic was cradled on the Plains of Abraham.
The Spanish and Indian menaces were also now substantially reduced.
Spain was eliminated from Florida, although entrenched in Louisiana and New Orleans, and was still securely in possession of much of western North America, including the vast territory from present-day Texas to California.
As for the Indians, the Treaty of Paris that ended the French and Indian War dealt a harsh blow to the Iroquois, Creeks, and other interior tribes.
The Spanish removal from Florida and the French removal from Canada deprived the Indians of their most powerful diplomatic weaponthe ability to play off the rival European powers against one another.
In the future the Indians would have to negotiate exclusively with the British.
Sensing the newly precarious position of the Indian peoples, the Ottawa chief Pontiac in 1763 led several tribes, aided by a handful of French traders who remained in the region, in a violent campaign to drive the British out of the Ohio country.
Pontiacs warriors besieged Detroit in the spring of 1763 and eventually overran all but three British posts west of the Appalachians, killing some two thousand soldiers and settlers.
The British retaliated swiftly and cruelly.
Waging a primitive version of biological warfare, one British commander ordered blankets infected with smallpox to be distributed among the Indians.
Such tactics crushed the uprising and brought an uneasy truce to the frontier.
His bold plan frustrated, Pontiac himself perished in 1769 at the hands of a rival chieftain.
As for the British, the bloody episode convinced them of the need to stabilize relations with C HAPTER 6 The Duel for North America, 16081763 N.H.
MASS.
MAINE (Part of Mass.
) CONN.
R.I.
N.Y.
N.J.
DEL.
N.C.
S.C.
Savannah Charleston Wilmington Williamsburg Philadelphia New York Hartford Albany Fort Niagara Fort Pitt Detroit Fort Michilimackinac Providence Portsmouth Boston St.
Marys Annapolis Baltimore Jamestown Pontiac's uprising, 1763 Proclamation line of 1763 Area of settlement within the British colonies British Colonies at End of French and Indian War, 1763 This map, showing the colonies thirteen years before the Declaration of Independence, helps to explain why the British would be unable to conquer their offspring.
The colonists were spreading rapidly into the backcountry, where the powerful British navy could not flush them out.
During the Revolutionary War, the British at one time or another captured the leading colonial citiesBoston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charlestonbut the more remote interior remained a sanctuary for rebels.
the western Indians and to keep regular troops stationed along the restless frontier, a measure for which they soon asked the colonists to foot the bill.
Land-hungry American colonists were now free to burst over the dam of the Appalachian Mountains and flood out over the verdant western lands.
A tiny rivulet of pioneers like Daniel Boone had already trickled into Tennessee and Kentucky; other courageous settlers made their preparations for the long, dangerous trek over the mountains.
Then, out of a clear sky, the London government issued its Proclamation of 1763.
It flatly prohibited settlement in the area beyond the Appalachians, pending further adjustments.
The truth is that this hastily drawn document was not designed to oppress the colonists at all, but to work out the Indian problem fairly and prevent another bloody eruption like Pontiacs uprising.
But countless Americans, especially land speculators, were dismayed and angered.
Was not the land beyond the mountains their birthright?
Had they not, in addition, purchased it with their blood in the recent war?
In complete defiance of the proclamation, they clogged the westward trails.
In 1765 an estimated one thousand wagons rolled through the town of Salisbury, North Carolina, on their way up west.
This wholesale flouting of royal authority boded ill for the longevity of British rule in America.
The French and Indian War also caused the colonists to develop a new vision of their destiny.
With the path cleared for the conquest of a continent, with their birthrate high and their energy boundless, they sensed that they were a potent people on the march.
And they were in no mood to be restrained.
Lordly Britons, whose suddenly swollen empire had tended to produce swollen heads, were in no mood for back talk.
Puffed up over their recent victories, they were already annoyed with their unruly colonial subjects.
The stage was set for a violent family quarrel.
Edict of Nantes Champlain colonizes Quebec for  France Louis XIV becomes king of France La Salle explores Mississippi River to  the Gulf of Mexico King Williams War (War of the League of Augsburg) Queen Annes War (War of Spanish Succession) French found New Orleans War of Jenkinss Ear King Georges War (War of Austrian  Succession) Washington battles French on frontier  Albany Congress French and Indian War (Seven Years War) Braddocks defeat Pitt emerges as leader of British  government Battle of Quebec Peace of Paris Pontiacs uprising Proclamation of 1763 For further reading, see page A4 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Road to Revolution  17631775 J OHN A DAMS , 1818 V ictory in the Seven Years War made Britain the master of a vastly enlarged imperial domain in North America.
But victoryincluding the subsequent need to garrison ten thousand troops along the sprawling American frontierwas painfully costly.
The London government therefore struggled after 1763 to compel the American colonists to shoulder some of the financial costs of empire.
This change in British colonial policy reinforced an emerging sense of American political identity and helped to precipitate the American Revolution.
The eventual conflict was by no means inevitable.
Indeed, given the tightening commercial, military, and cultural bonds between colonies and mother country since the first crude settlements a century and a half earlier, it might be considered remarkable that the Revolution happened at all.
The truth is that Americans were reluctant revolutionaries.
Until late in the the day, they sought only to claim the rights of Englishmen, not to separate from the mother country.
But what began as a squabble about economic policies soon exposed irreconcilable differences between Americans and Britons over cherished political principles.
The ensuing clash gave birth to a new nation.
In a broad sense, America was a revolutionary force from the day of its discovery by Europeans.
The New World nurtured new ideas about the nature of society, citizen, and government.
In the Old World, many humble folk had long lived in the shadow of graveyards that contained the bones of their ancestors for a thousand years past.
Few people born into such changeless surroundings dared to question their lowly social status.
But European immigrants in the New World were not so easily subdued by the scowl of their superiors.
In the American wilderness, they encountered a world that was theirs to make afresh.
Two ideas in particular had taken root in the minds of the American colonists by the mid-eighteenth century: one was what historians call  Greek and Roman republics, exponents of republicanism defined a just society as one in which all citizens willingly subordinated their private, selfish interests to the common good.
Both the stability  of society and the authority of government thus depended on the virtue of the citizenryits capacity for selflessness, self-sufficiency, and courage, and especially its appetite for civic involvement.
By its very nature, republicanism was opposed to hierarchical and authoritarian institutions such as aristocracy and monarchy.
A second idea that fundamentally shaped American political thought derived from a group of British political commentators know as radical Whigs.
Widely read by the colonists, the Whigs feared the threat to liberty posed by the arbitrary power of the monarch and his ministers relative to elected representatives in Parliament.
The Whigs mounted withering attacks on the use of patronage and bribes by the kings ministerssymptoms of a wider moral failure in society that they called corruption, in the sense of rot or decay.
The Whigs warned citizens to be on guard against corruption and to be eternally vigilant against possible conspiracies to denude them of their hard-won liberties.
Together, republican and Whig ideas predisposed the American colonists to be on hair-trigger alert against any threat to their rights.
The circumstances of colonial life had done much to bolster those attitudes.
Dukes and princes, barons and bishops were unknown in the colonies, while property ownership and political participation were relatively widespread.
The Americans had also grown accustomed to running their own affairs, largely unmolested by remote officials in London.
Distance weakens authority; great distance weakens authority greatly.
So it came as an especially jolting shock when Britain after 1763 tried to enclose its American colonists more snugly in its grip.
Britains empire was acquired in a fit of absentmindedness, an old saying goes, and there is much truth in the jest.
Not one of the original thirteen colonies except Georgia was formally planted by the British government.
All the others were haphazardly founded by trading companies, religious groups, or land speculators.
The British authorities nevertheless embraced a theory, called mercantilism, that justified their control over the colonies.
Mercantilists believed that wealth was power and that a countrys economic wealth (and hence its military and political power) could be measured by the amount of gold or silver in its treasury.
To amass gold or silver, a country needed to export more than it imported.
Possessing colonies thus conferred distinct advantages, since the colonies could both supply raw materials to the mother country (thereby reducing the need for foreign imports) and provide a guaranteed market for exports.
The London government looked on the American colonists more or less as tenants.
They were expected to furnish products needed in the mother country, such as tobacco, sugar, and ships masts; to refrain from making for export certain products, such as woolen cloth or beaver hats; to buy imported manufactured goods exclusively from Britain; and not to indulge in bothersome dreams of economic self-sufficiency or, worse, self-government.
From time to time, Parliament passed laws to regulate the mercantilist system.
The first of these, the Navigation Law of 1650, was aimed at rival To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of mankind.
Dutch shippers trying to elbow their way into the American carrying trade.
Thereafter all commerce flowing to and from the colonies could be transported only in British (including colonial) vessels.
Subsequent laws required that European goods destined for America first had to be landed in Britain, where tariff duties could be collected and British middlemen could take a slice of the profits.
Other laws stipulated that American merchants must ship certain enumerated products, notably tobacco, exclusively to Britain, even though prices might be better elsewhere.
British policy also inflicted a currency shortage on the colonies.
Since the colonists regularly bought more from Britain than they sold there, the difference had to be made up in hard cash.
Every year gold and silver coins, mostly earned in illicit trade with the Spanish and French West Indies, drained out of the colonies, creating an acute money shortage.
To facilitate everyday purchases, the colonists resorted to butter, nails, pitch, and feathers for purposes of exchange.
Currency issues came to a boil when dire financial need forced many of the colonies to issue paper money, which swiftly depreciated.
British merchants and creditors squawked so loudly that Parliament prohibited the colonial legislatures from printing paper currency and from passing indulgent bankruptcy lawspractices that might harm British merchants.
The Americans grumbled that their welfare was being sacrificed for the well-being of British commercial interests.
The British crown also reserved the right to nullify any legislation passed by the colonial assemblies if such laws worked mischief with the mercantilist system.
This royal veto was used rather sparingly just 469 times in connection with 8,563 laws.
But  the colonists fiercely resented its very existence another example of how principle could weigh more heavily than practice in fueling colonial grievances.
In theory the British mercantile system seemed thoroughly selfish and deliberately oppressive.
But the truth is that until 1763, the various Navigation Laws imposed no intolerable burden, mainly because they were only loosely enforced.
Enterprising colonial merchants learned early to disregard or evade troublesome restrictions.
Some of the first American fortunes, like that of John Hancock, were amassed by wholesale smuggling.
C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 A colonist cannot make a button, a horseshoe, nor a hobnail, but some snooty ironmonger or respectable buttonmaker of Britain shall bawl and squall that his honors worship is most egregiously maltreated, injured, cheated, and robbed by the rascally American republicans.
Americans also reaped direct benefits from the mercantile system.
If the colonies existed for the benefit of the mother country, it was hardly less true that Britain existed for the benefit of the colonies.
London paid liberal bounties to colonial producers of ship parts, over the protests of British competitors.
Virginia tobacco planters enjoyed a monopoly in the British market, snuffing out the tiny British tobacco industry.
The colonists also benefited from the protection of the worlds mightiest navy and a strong, seasoned army of redcoatsall without a penny of cost.
But even when painted in its rosiest colors, the mercantile system burdened the colonists with annoying liabilities.
Mercantilism stifled economic initiative and imposed a rankling dependency on British agents and creditors.
Most grievously, many Americans simply found the mercantilist system debasing.
They felt used, kept in a state of perpetual economic adolescence, and never allowed to come of age.
As Benjamin Franklin wrote in 1775,  Revolution broke out, as Theodore Roosevelt later remarked, because Britain failed to recognize an emerging nation when it saw one.
Victory-flushed Britain emerged from the Seven Years War holding one of the biggest empires in the worldand also, less happily, the biggest debt, some 140 million, about half of which had been incurred defending the American colonies.
To justify and service that debt, British officials now moved to redefine their relationship with their North American colonies.
Prime Minister George Grenville first aroused the resentment of the colonists in 1763 by ordering the British navy to begin strictly enforcing the Navigation Laws.
He also secured from Parliament the so-called Sugar Act of 1764, the first law ever passed by that body for raising tax revenue in the colonies for the crown.
Among various provisions, it increased the duty on foreign sugar imported from Young man, there is Americawhich at this day serves for little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, show itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.
the West Indies.
After bitter protests from the colonists, the duties were lowered substantially, and the agitation died down.
But resentment was kept burning by the Quartering Act of 1765.
This measure required certain colonies to provide food and quarters for British troops.
Then in the same year, 1765, Grenville imposed the most odious measure of all: a stamp tax, to raise revenues to support the new military force.
The Stamp Act mandated the use of stamped paper or the affixing of stamps, certifying payment of tax.
Stamps were required on bills of sale for about fifty trade items as well as on certain types of commercial and legal documents, including playing cards, pamphlets, newspapers, diplomas, bills of lading, and marriage licenses.
Grenville regarded all these measures as reasonable and just.
He was simply asking the Americans to pay a fair share of the costs for their own defense, through taxes that were already familiar in Britain.
In fact, the British people for two generations had endured a stamp tax far heavier than that passed for the colonies.
Yet the Americans were angrily aroused at what they regarded as Grenvilles fiscal aggression.
The new laws did not merely pinch their pocketbooks.
Far more ominously, Grenville also seemed to be striking at the local liberties they had come to assume as a matter of right.
Thus some colonial assemblies defiantly refused to comply with the Quartering Act, or voted only a fraction of the supplies that it called for.
Worst of all, Grenvilles noxious legislation seemed to jeopardize the basic rights of the colonists as Englishmen.
Both the Sugar Act and the Stamp Act provided for trying offenders in the hated admiralty courts, where juries were not allowed.
The burden of proof was on the defendants, who were assumed to be guilty unless they could prove themselves innocent.
Trial by jury and the precept of innocent until proved guilty were ancient privileges that British people everywhere, including the American colonists, held most dear.
And why was a British army needed at all in the colonies, now that the French were expelled from the continent and Pontiacs warriors crushed?
Could its real purpose be to whip rebellious colonists into line?
Many Americans, weaned on radical Whig suspicion of all authority, began to sniff the strong scent of a conspiracy to strip them of their historic liberties.
They lashed back violently, and the Stamp Act became the target that drew their most ferocious fire.
Angry throats raised the cry, No taxation without representation.
There was some irony in the slogan, because the seaports and tidewater towns that were most wrathful against the Stamp Act had long denied full representation to their own backcountry pioneers.
But now the aggravated colonists took the high ground of principle.
C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 .
considering the utter impracticability of their ever being fully and equally represented in Parliament, and the great expense that must unavoidably attend even a partial representation there, this House think that a taxation of their constituents, even without their consent, grievous as it is, would be preferable to any representation that could be admitted for them there.
The Americans made a distinction between legislation and taxation.
They conceded the right of Parliament to legislate about matters that affected the entire empire, including the regulation of trade.
But they steadfastly denied the right of Parliament, in which no Americans were seated, to impose taxes on Americans.
Only their own elected colonial legislatures, the Americans insisted, could legally tax them.
Taxes levied by the distant British Parliament amounted to robbery, a piratical assault on the sacred rights of property.
Grenville dismissed these American protests as hairsplitting absurdities.
The power of Parliament was supreme and undivided, he asserted, and in any case the Americans  Elaborating the theory of virtual representation, Grenville claimed that every member of Parliament represented all British subjects, even those Americans in Boston or Charleston who had never voted for a member of Parliament.
The Americans scoffed at the notion of virtual representation.
And truthfully, they did not really want direct representation in Parliament, which might have seemed like a sensible compromise.
If they had obtained it, any gouty member of the House of Commons could have proposed an oppressive tax bill for the colonies, and the American representatives, few in number, would have stood bereft of a principle with which to resist.
Thus the principle of no taxation without representation was supremely important, and the colonists clung to it with tenacious consistency.
When the British replied that the sovereign power of government could not be divided between legislative authority in London and taxing authority in the colonies, they forced the Americans to deny the authority of Parliament altogether and to begin to consider their own political independence.
This chain of logic eventually led, link by link, to revolutionary consequences.
Colonial outcries against the hated stamp tax took various forms.
The most conspicuous assemblage was the Stamp Act Congress of 1765, which brought together in New York City twenty-seven distinguished delegates from nine colonies.
After dignified debate the members drew up a statement of their rights and grievances and beseeched the king and Parliament to repeal the repugnant legislation.
The Stamp Act Congress, which was largely ignored in England, made little splash at the time in America.
Its ripples, however, began to erode sectional suspicions, for it brought together around the same table leaders from the different and rival colonies.
It was one more halting but significant step toward intercolonial unity.
More effective than the congress was the widespread adoption of nonimportation agreements against British goods.
Woolen garments of homespun became fashionable, and the eating of lamb chops was discouraged so that the wool-bearing sheep would be allowed to mature.
Nonimportation agreements were in fact a promising stride toward union; they spontaneously united the American people for the first time in common action.
Mobilizing in support of nonimportation gave ordinary American men and women new opportunities to participate in colonial protests.
Many people who had previously stood on the sidelines now signed petitions swearing to uphold the terms of the consumer boycotts.
Groups of women assembled in public to hold spinning bees and make homespun cloth as a replacement for shunned British textiles.
Such public defiance helped spread revolutionary fervor throughout American colonial society.
Sometimes violence accompanied colonial protests.
Groups of ardent spirits, known as Sons of Liberty and Daughters of Liberty, took the law into their own hands.
Crying Liberty, Property, and No Stamps, they enforced the nonimportation agreements against violators, often with a generous coat of tar and feathers.
Patriotic mobs ransacked the houses of unpopular officials, confiscated their money, and hanged effigies of stamp agents on liberty poles.
Shaken by colonial commotion, the machinery for collecting the tax broke down.
On that dismal day in 1765 when the new act was to go into effect, the stamp agents had all been forced to resign, and there was no one to sell the stamps.
While flags flapped at half-mast, the law was openly and flagrantly defiedor, rather, nullified.
England was hard hit.
America then bought about one-quarter of all British exports, and about one-half of British shipping was devoted to the American trade.
Merchants, manufacturers, and shippers suffered from the colonial nonimportation agreements, and hundreds of laborers were thrown out of work.
Loud demands converged on Parliament for repeal of the Stamp Act.
But many of the members could not understand why 7.5 million Britons had to pay heavy taxes to protect the colonies, whereas some 2 million colonists refused to pay for only one-third of the cost of their own defense.
After a stormy debate, Parliament in 1766 grudgingly repealed the Stamp Act.
Grateful residents of New York erected a leaden statue to King George III.
But American rejoicing was premature.
Having withdrawn the Stamp Act, Parliament in virtually the same breath provocatively passed the Declaratory Act, reaffirming Parliaments right to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever.
The British government thereby drew its line in the sand.
It defined the constitutional principle it would not yield: absolute and unqualified sovereignty over its North American colonies.
The colonists had already drawn their own battle line by making it clear that they wanted a measure of sovereignty of their own and would undertake drastic action to secure it.
The stage was set for a continuing confrontation.
Within a few years, that statue of King George would be melted into thousands of bullets to be fired at his troops.
C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 Control of the British ministry was now seized by the gifted but erratic Champagne Charley Townshend, a man who could deliver brilliant speeches in Parliament even while drunk.
Rashly promising to pluck feathers from the colonial goose with a minimum of squawking, he persuaded Parliament in 1767 to pass the Townshend Acts.
The most important of these new regulations was a light import duty on glass, white lead, paper, paint, and tea.
Townshend, seizing on a dubious distinction between internal and external taxes, made this tax, unlike the Stamp Act, an indirect customs duty payable at American ports.
But to the increasingly restless colonists, this was a phantom distinction.
For them the real difficulty remained taxesin any formwithout representation.
Flushed with their recent victory over the stamp tax, the colonists were in a rebellious mood.
The impost on tea was especially irksome, for an estimated 1 million people drank the refreshing brew twice  a day.
The new Townshend revenues, worse yet, were to be earmarked to pay the salaries of the royal governors and judges in America.
From the standpoint of efficient administration by London, this was a reform long overdue.
But the ultrasuspicious Americans, who had beaten the royal governors into line by controlling the purse, regarded Townshends tax as another attempt to enchain them.
Their worst fears took on greater reality when the London government, after passing the Townshend taxes, suspended the legislature of New York in 1767 for failure to comply with the Quartering Act.
Nonimportation agreements, previously potent, were quickly revived against the Townshend Acts.
But they proved less effective than those devised against the Stamp Act.
The colonists, again enjoying prosperity, took the new tax less seriously than might have been expected, largely because it was light and indirect.
They found, moreover, that they could secure smuggled tea at a cheap price, and consequently smugglers increased their activities, especially in Massachusetts.
British officials, faced with a breakdown of law and order, landed two regiments of troops in Boston in 1768.
Many of the soldiers were drunken and profane characters.
Liberty-loving colonists, resenting the presence of the red-coated ruffians, taunted the bloody backs unmercifully.
A clash was inevitable.
On the evening of March 5, 1770, a crowd of some sixty townspeople set upon a squad of about ten redcoats, one of whom was hit We the Daughters of those Patriots who have and now do appear for the public interest .
do with Pleasure engage with them in denying ourselves the drinking of Foreign Tea, in hopes to frustrate a Plan that tends to deprive the whole Community of .
all that is valuable in Life.
by a club and another of whom was knocked down.
Acting apparently without orders but under extreme provocation, the troops opened fire and killed or wounded eleven innocent citizens.
One of the first to die was Crispus Attucks, described by contemporaries as a powerfully built runaway mulatto and as a leader of the mob.
Both sides were in some degree to blame, and in the subsequent trial (in which future president John Adams served as defense attorney for the soldiers), only two of the redcoats were found guilty of manslaughter.
The soldiers were released after being branded on the hand.
By 1770 King George III, then only thirty-two years old, was strenuously attempting to assert the power of the British monarchy.
He was a good man in his private morals, but he proved to be a bad ruler.
Earnest, industrious, stubborn, and lustful for power, he surrounded himself with cooperative yes men, notably his corpulent prime minister, Lord North.
The ill-timed Townshend Acts had failed to  produce revenue, though they did produce nearrebellion.
Net proceeds from the tax in one year were a paltry 295, and during that time the annual military costs to Britain in the colonies had mounted to 170,000.
Nonimportation agreements, though feebly enforced, were pinching British manufacturers.
The government of Lord North, bowing to various pressures, finally persuaded Parliament to repeal the Townshend revenue duties.
But the three-pence toll on tea, the tax the colonists found most offensive, was retained to keep alive the principle of parliamentary taxation.
Flames of discontent in America continued to be fanned by numerous incidents, including the redoubled efforts of the British officials to enforce the Navigation Laws.
Resistance was further kindled C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 by a master propagandist and engineer of rebellion, Samuel Adams of Boston, a cousin of John Adams.
Unimpressive in appearance (his hands trembled), he lived and breathed only for politics.
His friends had to buy him a presentable suit of clothes when he left Massachusetts on intercolonial business.
Zealous, tenacious, and courageous, he was ultrasensitive to infractions of colonial rights.
Cherishing a deep faith in the common people, he appealed effectively to what was called his trained mob.
Samuel Adamss signal contribution was to organize in Massachusetts the local committees of correspondence.
After he had formed the first one in Boston during 1772, some eighty towns in the colony speedily set up similar organizations.
Their chief function was to spread the spirit of resistance by interchanging letters and thus keep alive opposition to British policy.
One critic referred to the committees as the foulest, subtlest, and most  venomous serpent ever issued from the egg of  sedition.
Intercolonial committees of correspondence were the next logical step.
Virginia led the way in 1773 by creating such a body as a standing committee of the House of Burgesses.
Within a short time, every colony had established a central committee through which it could exchange ideas and information with other colonies.
These intercolonial groups were supremely significant in stimulating and disseminating sentiment in favor of united action.
They evolved directly into the first American congresses.
Thus farthat is, by 1773nothing had happened to make rebellion inevitable.
Nonimportation was weakening.
Increasing numbers of colonists were reluctantly paying the tea tax, because the legal tea was now cheaper than the smuggled tea, even cheaper than tea in England.
A new ogre entered the picture in 1773.
The powerful British East India Company, overburdened with 17 million pounds of unsold tea, was facing bankruptcy.
If it collapsed, the London government would lose heavily in tax revenue.
The ministry therefore decided to assist the company by awarding it a complete monopoly of the American tea business.
The giant corporation would now be able to sell the coveted leaves more cheaply than ever before, even with the three-pence tax tacked on.
But many American tea drinkers, rather than rejoicing at the lower prices, cried foul.
They saw this British move as a shabby attempt to trick the Americans, with the bait of cheaper tea, into swallowing the principle of the detested tax.
For the determined Americans, principle remained far more important than price.
If the British officials insisted on the letter of the law, violence would certainly result.
Fatefully, the British colonial authorities decided to enforce the law.
Once more, the colonists rose up in wrath to defy it.
Not a single one of the several thousand chests  of tea shipped by the East India Company ever reached the hands of the consignees.
In Philadelphia and New York, mass demonstrations forced the tea-bearing ships to return to England with their cargo holds still full.
At Annapolis, Marylanders burned both cargo and vessel, while proclaiming Liberty and Independence or death in pursuit of it.
In Charleston, South Carolina, officials seized the tea for nonpayment of duties after intimidated local merchants refused to accept delivery.
(IroniC HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 [the colonial] upper & lower House consisted of Men generally devoted to the Interest of the Faction.
The Foundations of Government were subverted; & every Loyalist was obliged to submit to be swept away by the Torrent.
Some indeed dared to say that their Souls were their own; but no one could call his Body his own; for that was at the Mercy of the Mob, who like the Inquisition Coach, would call a Man out of his Bed, & he must step in whether he liked the Conveyance or not.
cally, the confiscated Charleston tea was later auctioned to raise money for the Revolutionary army.
) Only in Boston did a British official stubbornly refuse to be cowed.
Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson had already felt the fury of the mob, when Stamp Act protesters had destroyed his home in 1765.
This time he was determined not to budge.
Ironically, Hutchinson agreed that the tea tax was unjust, but he believed even more strongly that the colonists had no right to flout the law.
Hutchinson infuriated Bostons radicals when he ordered the tea ships not to clear Boston harbor until they had unloaded their cargoes.
Sentiment against him was further inflamed when Hutchinsons enemies published a private letter in which he declared that an abridgement of what are called English liberties was necessary for the preservation of law and order in the coloniesapparently confirming the darkest conspiracy theories of the American radicals.
Provoked beyond restraint, a band of Bostonians, clumsily disguised as Indians, boarded the docked tea ships on December 16, 1773.
They smashed open 342 chests and dumped the contents into Boston harbor.
A silent crowd watched approvingly as salty tea was brewed for the fish.
Reactions varied.
Radicals exulted in the peoples zeal for liberty.
Conservatives complained that the destruction of private property violated the fundamental norms of civil society.
Hutchinson, chastened and disgusted, betook himself to Britain, never to return.
The British authorities, meanwhile, saw little alternative to whipping the upstart colonists into shape.
The granting of some measure of home rule to the Americans might at this stage still have prevented rebellion, but few Britons of that era were blessed with such wisdom.
Among those who were so blessed was Edmund Burke, the great conservative political theorist and a stout champion of the American cause.
To tax and to please, no more than to love and be wise, he stoically remarked, is not given to men.
An irate Parliament responded speedily to the Boston Tea Party with measures that brewed a revolution.
By huge majorities in 1774, it passed a series of acts designed to chastise Boston in particular, Massachusetts in general.
They were branded in America as the massacre of American Liberty.
Most drastic of all was the Boston Port Act.
It closed the tea-stained harbor until damages were paid and order could be ensured.
By other Intolerable Actsas they were called in Americamany of the chartered rights of colonial Massachusetts were swept away.
Restrictions were likewise placed on the precious town meetings.
Contrary to previous practice, enforcing officials who killed colonists in the line of duty could now be sent to Britain for trial.
There, suspicious Americans assumed, they would be likely to get off scot-free.
By a fateful coincidence, the Intolerable Acts were accompanied in 1774 by the Quebec Act.
Passed at the same time, it was erroneously regarded in English-speaking America as part of the British reaction to the turbulence in Boston.
Actually, the Quebec Act was a good law in bad company.
For many years the British government had debated how it should administer the sixty thousand or so conquered French subjects in Canada, and it had finally framed this farsighted and statesmanlike measure.
The French were guaranteed their Catholic religion.
They were also permitted to retain many of their old customs and institutions, which did not include a representative assembly or trial by jury in civil cases.
In addition, the old boundaries of the province of Quebec were now extended southward all the way to the Ohio River.
The Quebec Act, from the viewpoint of the French-Canadians, was a shrewd and conciliatory measure.
If Britain had only shown as much foresight in dealing with its English-speaking colonies, it might not have lost them.
But from the viewpoint of the American colonists as a whole, the Quebec Act was especially noxious.
All the other Intolerable Acts laws slapped directly at Massachusetts, but this one had a much wider range.
It seemed to set a dangerous precedent in America against jury trials and popular assemblies.
It alarmed land speculators, who were distressed to see the huge trans-Allegheny area snatched from their grasp.
It aroused anti-Catholics, who were shocked by the extension of Roman Catholic jurisdiction southward into a huge region that had once been earmarked for Protestantisma region about as large as the thirteen original colonies.
One angry Protestant cried that there ought to be a jubilee in hell over this enormous gain for popery.
American dissenters responded sympathetically to the plight of Massachusetts.
It had put itself in the wrong by the violent destruction of the tea cargoes; now Britain had put itself in the wrong by brutal punishment that seemed far too cruel for the crime.
Flags were flown at half-mast throughout the colonies on the day that the Boston Port Act went into effect, and sister colonies rallied to send food to the stricken city.
Rice was shipped even from faraway South Carolina.
Most memorable of the responses to the Intolerable Acts was the summoning of a Continental Congress in 1774.
It was to meet in Philadelphia to consider ways of redressing colonial grievances.
Twelve of the thirteen colonies, with Georgia alone missing, sent fifty-five distinguished men, among them Samuel Adams, John Adams, George Washington, and Patrick Henry.
Intercolonial frictions were partially melted away by social activity after working hours; in fifty-four days George Washington dined at his own lodgings only nine times.
The First Continental Congress deliberated for seven weeks, from September 5 to October 26, 1774.
It was not a legislative but a consultative bodya convention rather than a congress.
John Adams played a stellar role.
Eloquently swaying his colleagues to a revolutionary course, he helped defeat by the narrowest of margins a proposal by the moderates for a species of American home rule under British direction.
After prolonged argument the Congress drew up several dignified papers.
These included a ringing Declaration of Rights, as well as solemn appeals to other British American colonies, to the king, and to the British people.
The most significant action of the Congress was the creation of The Association.
Unlike previous nonimportation agreements, The Association called for a  tion, nonexportation, and nonconsumption.
Yet it is important to note that the delegates were not yet calling for independence.
They sought merely to repeal the offensive legislation and return to the happy days before parliamentary taxation.
If colonial grievances were redressed, well and good; if not, the Congress was to meet again in May 1775.
Resistance had not yet ripened into open rebellion.
But the fatal drift toward war continued.
Parliament rejected the Congresss petitions.
In America chickens squawked and tar kettles bubbled as violators of The Association were tarred and feathered.
Muskets were gathered, men began to drill openly, and a clash seemed imminent.
In April 1775 the British commander in Boston sent a detachment of troops to nearby Lexington C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 QUEBEC Quebec Montreal NOVA SCOTIA NEW YORK PENNSYLVANIA VIRGINIA Quebec before 1774 Quebec after 1774, as envisioned by the Quebec Act.
Quebec Before and After 1774 Young Alexander Hamilton voiced the fears of many colonists when he warned that the Quebec Act of 1774 would introduce priestly tyranny into Canada, making that country another Spain or Portugal.
Does not your blood run cold, he asked, to think that an English Parliament should pass an act for the establishment of arbitrary power and Popery in such a country?
and Concord.
They were to seize stores of colonial gunpowder and also to bag the rebel ringleaders, Samuel Adams and John Hancock.
At Lexington the colonial Minute Men refused to disperse rapidly enough, and shots were fired that killed eight Americans and wounded several more.
The affair was more the Lexington Massacre than a battle.
The redcoats pushed on to Concord, whence they were forced to retreat by the rough and ready Americans, whom Emerson immortalized: The bewildered British, fighting off murderous fire from militiamen crouched behind thick stone walls, finally regained the sanctuary of Boston.
Licking their wounds, they could count about three hundred casualties, including some seventy killed.
Britain now had a war on its hands.
Aroused Americans had brashly rebelled against a mighty empire.
The population odds were about three to one against the rebelssome 7.5 million Britons to 2.5 million colonists.
The odds in monetary wealth and naval power overwhelmingly favored the mother country.
Britain then boasted a professional army of some fifty thousand men, as compared with the numerous but wretchedly trained American militia.
George III, in addition, had the treasury to hire foreign soldiers, and some thirty thousand Germans so-called Hessianswere ultimately employed.
The British enrolled about fifty thousand American Loyalists and enlisted the services of many Indians, who though unreliable fair-weather fighters, inflamed long stretches of the frontier.
One British officer boasted that the war would offer no problems that could not be solved by an experienced sheep herder.
Yet Britain was weaker than it seemed at first glance.
Oppressed Ireland was a smoking volcano, and British troops had to be detached to watch it.
France, bitter from its recent defeat, was awaiting an *Ralph Waldo Emerson, Concord Hymn.
opportunity to stab Britain in the back.
The London government was confused and inept.
There was no William Pitt, Organizer of Victory, only the stubborn George III and his pliant Tory prime minister, Lord North.
Many earnest and God-fearing Britons had no desire whatever to kill their American cousins.
William Pitt withdrew a son from the army rather than see him thrust his sword into fellow AngloSaxons struggling for liberty.
The English Whig factions, opposed to Lord Norths Tory wing, openly cheered American victoriesat least at the outset.
Aside from trying to embarrass the Tories politically, many Whigs believed that the battle for British freedom was being fought in America.
If George III triumphed, his rule at home might become tyrannical.
This outspoken sympathy in Britain, though plainly a minority voice, greatly encouraged the Americans.
If they continued their resistance long enough, the Whigs might come into power and deal generously with them.
Britains army in America had to operate under endless difficulties.
The generals were second-rate; the soldiers, though on the whole capable, were brutally treated.
There was one extreme case of eight hundred lashes on the bare back for striking an officer.
Provisions were often scarce, rancid, and wormy.
On one occasion a supply of biscuits, captured some fifteen years earlier from the French, was softened by dropping cannonballs on them.
Other handicaps loomed.
The redcoats had to conquer the Americans; restoring the pre-1763 status quo would be a victory for the colonists.
Britain was operating some 3,000 miles from its home base, and distance added greatly to the delays and uncertainties arising from storms and other mishaps.
Military orders were issued in London that, when received months later, would not fit the changing situation.
Americas geographical expanse was enormous: roughly 1,000 by 600 miles.
The united colonies had no urban nerve center, like Frances Paris, whose capture would cripple the country as a whole.
British armies took every city of any size, yet like a boxer punching a feather pillow, they made little more than a dent in the entire country.
The Americans wisely traded space for time.
Benjamin Franklin calculated that during the prolonged campaign in which the redcoats captured Bunker Hill and killed some 150 Patriots, about 60,000 American babies were born.
The revolutionists were blessed with outstanding leadership.
George Washington was a giant among men; Benjamin Franklin was a master among diplomats.
Open foreign aid, theoretically possible from the start, eventually came from France.
Numerous European officers, many of them unemployed and impoverished, volunteered their swords for pay.
In a class by himself was a wealthy young French nobleman, the Marquis de Lafayette.
Fleeing from boredom, loving glory and ultimately liberty, at age nineteen the French gamecock was made a major general in the colonial army.
His commission was largely a recognition of his family influence and political connections, but the services of this teenage general in securing further aid from France were invaluable.
Other conditions aided the Americans.
They were fighting defensively, with the odds, all things considered, favoring the defender.
In agriculture, the colonies were mainly self-sustaining, like a kind of Robinson Crusoes island.
The Americans also enjoyed the moral advantage that came from belief in a just cause.
The historical odds were not impossible.
Other peoples had triumphed in the face of greater obstacles: Greeks against Persians, Swiss against Austrians, Dutch against Spaniards.
C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 To place any dependence upon militia is assuredly resting on a broken staff.
The sudden change in their manner of living .
brings on sickness in many, impatience in all, and such an unconquerable desire of returning to their respective homes that it not only produces shameful and scandalous desertions among themselves, but infuses the like spirit in others.
If I was called upon to declare upon oath whether the militia have been most serviceable or hurtful upon the whole, I should subscribe to the latter.
Yet the American rebels were badly organized for war.
From the earliest days, they had been almost fatally lacking in unity, and the new nation lurched forward uncertainly like an uncoordinated centipede.
Even the Continental Congress, which directed the conflict, was hardly more than a debating society, and it grew feebler as the struggle dragged on.
Their Congress now is quite disjointd, gibed an English satirist, Since Gibbits (gallows) [are] for them appointed.
The disorganized colonists fought almost the entire war before adopting a written constitutionthe Articles of Confederationin 1781.
Jealousy everywhere raised its hideous head.
Individual states, proudly regarding themselves as sovereign, resented the attempts of Congress to exercise its flimsy powers.
Sectional jealousy boiled up over the appointment of military leaders; some distrustful New Englanders almost preferred British officers to Americans from other sections.
Economic difficulties were nearly insuperable.
Metallic money had already been heavily drained away.
A cautious Continental Congress, unwilling to raise anew the explosive issue of taxation, was forced to print Continental paper money in great amounts.
As this currency poured from the presses, it depreciated until the expression not worth a Continental became current.
One barber contemptuously papered his shop with the nearworthless dollars.
The confusion proliferated when the individual states were compelled to issue depreciated paper money of their own.
Inflation of the currency inevitably skyrocketed prices.
Families of the soldiers at the fighting front were hard hit, and hundreds of anxious husbands and fathers deserted.
Debtors easily acquired handfuls of the quasi-worthless money and gleefully paid their debts without mercysometimes with the bayonets of the authorities to back them up.
Basic military supplies in the colonies were dangerously scanty, especially firearms.
Legend to the contrary, colonial Americans were not a well-armed people.
Firearms were to be found in only a small minority of households, and many of those guns were the property of the local militia.
Not a single gun factory existed in the colonies, and an imported musket cost the equivalent of two months salary for a skilled artisan.
Small wonder that only one in twelve American militiamen reported for duty with Chimney corner patriots abound; venality, corruption, prostitution of office for selfish ends, abuse of trust, perversion of funds from a national to a private use, and speculations upon the necessities of the times pervade all interests.
his own musketor that Benjamin Franklin seriously proposed arming the American troops with bows and arrows.
Among the reasons for the eventual alliance with France was the need for a reliable source of firearms.
Other shortages bedeviled the rebels.
At Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, shivering American soldiers went without bread for three successive days in the cruel winter of 17771778.
In one southern campaign, some men fainted for lack of food.
Manufactured goods also were generally in short supply in agricultural America, and clothing and shoes were appallingly scarce.
The path of the Patriot fighting men was often marked by bloody snow.
At frigid Valley Forge, during one anxious period, twenty-eight hundred men were barefooted or nearly naked.
Woolens were desperately needed against the wintry blasts, and in general the only real uniform of the colonial army was uniform raggedness.
During a grand parade at Valley Forge, some of the officers appeared wrapped in woolen bedcovers.
One Rhode Island unit was known as the Ragged, Lousy, Naked Regiment.
American militiamen were numerous but also highly unreliable.
Able-bodied American males perhaps several hundred thousand of themhad received rudimentary training, and many of these recruits served for short terms in the rebel armies.
But poorly trained plowboys could not stand up in the open field against professional British troops advancing with bare bayonets.
Many of these undisciplined warriors would, in the words of Washington, fly from their own shadows.
A few thousand regularsperhaps seven or eight thousand at the wars endwere finally whipped into shape by stern drillmasters.
Notable among them was an organizational genius, the salty German Baron von Steuben.
He spoke no English when he reached America, but he soon taught his men that bayonets were not for broiling beefsteaks over open fires.
As they gained experience, these soldiers of the Continental line more than held their own against crack British troops.
Blacks also fought and died for the American cause.
Although many states initially barred them from militia service, by wars end more than five thousand blacks had enlisted in the American armed forces.
The largest contingents came from the northern states with substantial numbers of free blacks.
Blacks fought at Trenton, Brandywine, Saratoga, and other important battles.
Some, including Prince Whipplelater immortalized in Emanuel Leutzes famous painting Washington Crossing the Delaware (see p.
153)became military heroes.
Others served as cooks, guides, spies, drivers, and road builders.
African-Americans also served on the British side.
In November 1775 Lord Dunmore, royal governor of Virginia, issued a proclamation promising freedom for any enslaved black in Virginia who joined the British army.
News of Dunmores decree traveled swiftly.
Virginia and Maryland tightened slave patrols, but within one month, three hundred slaves had joined what came to be called Lord Dunmores Ethiopian Regiment.
In time thousands of blacks fled plantations for British promises of emancipation.
When one of James Madisons slaves was caught trying to escape to the British lines, Madison refused to punish him for coveting that liberty that white Americans proclaimed the right & worthy pursuit of every human being.
At wars end the British kept their word, to some at least, and evacuated as many as fourteen thousand Black Loyalists to Nova Scotia, Jamaica, and England.
Morale in the Revolutionary army was badly undermined by American profiteers.
Putting profits before patriotism, they sold to the British because the invader could pay in gold.
Speculators forced prices sky-high, and some Bostonians made profits of 50 to 200 percent on army garb while the American army was freezing at Valley Forge.
Washington never had as many as twenty thousand effective C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 [Freedom] is their common Talk throughout the Province, and has occasioned impertinent behavior in many of them, insomuch that our Provincial Congress now sitting hath voted the immediate raising of Two Thousand Men Horse and food, to keep those mistaken creatures in awe.
troops in one place at one time, despite bounties of land and other inducements.
Yet if the rebels had thrown themselves into the struggle with zeal, they could easily have raised many times that number.
The brutal truth is that only a select minority of the American colonists attached themselves to the cause of independence with a spirit of selfless devotion.
These were the dedicated souls who bore the burden of battle and the risks of defeat; these were the freedom-loving Patriots who deserved the gratitude and esteem of generations yet unborn.
Seldom have so few done so much for so many.
First Navigation Laws to control colonial commerce Board of Trade assumes governance of colonies French and Indian War (Seven Years War) ends Sugar Act Quartering Act Stamp Act Stamp Act Congress Declaratory Act Townshend Acts passed New York legislature suspended by Parliament British troops occupy Boston Boston Massacre All Townshend Acts except tea tax repealed Committees of correspondence formed British East India Company granted tea  monopoly  Governor Hutchinsons actions provoke  Boston Tea Party Intolerable Acts Quebec Act First Continental Congress The Association boycotts British goods Battles of Lexington and Concord istorians once assumed that the Revolution was just another chapter in the unfolding story of human libertyan important way station on a divinely ordained pathway toward moral perfection in human affairs.
This approach, often labeled the Whig view of history, was best expressed in George Bancrofts ten-volume  1870s.
By the end of the nineteenth century, a group of historians known as the imperial school challenged Bancroft, arguing that the Revolution was best understood not as the fulfillment of national destiny, but as a constitutional conflict within the British Empire.
For historians like George Beer, Charles Andrews, and Lawrence Gipson, the Revolution was the product of a collision between  two different views of empire.
While the Americans were moving steadily toward more self-government, Britain increasingly tightened its grip, threatening a stranglehold that eventually led to wrenching revolution.
By the early twentieth century, these approaches were challenged by the so-called progressive historians, who argued that neither divine destiny nor constitutional quibbles had much to  do with the Revolution.
Rather, the Revolution stemmed from deep-seated class tensions within American society that, once released by revolt, produced a truly transformed social order.
Living themselves in a reform age when entrenched economic interests cowered under heavy attack, progressive historians like Carl Becker insisted that the Revolution was not just about home rule within  the British Empire, but also about who should rule at home in America, the upper or lower classes.
J. Franklin Jameson took Beckers analysis one step further in his influential  that the Revolution not only grew out of intense struggles between social groups, but also inspired many ordinary Americans to seek greater economic and political power, fundamentally democratizing society in its wake.
In the 1950s the progressive historians fell out of favor as the political climate became more conservative.
Interpretations of the American Revolution as a class struggle did not play well in a country obsessed with the spread of communism, and in its place arose the so-called consensus view.
Historians such as Robert Brown and Edmund Morgan downplayed the role of class conflict in the Revolutionary era, but emphasized that colonists of all ranks shared a commitment to certain fundamental political principles of self-government.
The unifying power of ideas was now back in fashion almost a hundred years after Bancroft.
Since the 1950s two broad interpretations have contended with each other and perpetuated the controversy over whether political ideals or economic and social realities were most responsible for the Revolution.
The first, articulated most prominently by Bernard Bailyn, has emphasized ideological and psychological factors.
Focusing on the power of ideas to foment revolution, Bailyn argued that the colonists, incited by their reading of seventeenthcentury and early-eighteenth-century English political theorists, grew extraordinarily (perhaps even exaggeratedly) suspicious of any attempts to tighten the imperial reins on the colonies.
When confronted with new taxes and commercial regulations, these hypersensitive colonists screamed conspiracy against liberty and corrupt ministerial plot.
In time they took up armed insurrection in defense of their intellectual commitment to liberty.
A second school of historians, writing during the 1960s and 1970s and inspired by the social movements of that turbulent era, revived the progressive interpretation of the Revolution.
Gary Nash, in  Countryman, in  pointed to the increasing social and economic divisions among Americans in both the urban seaports and the isolated countryside in the years leading up to the Revolution.
Attacks by laborers on political elites and expressions of resentment toward wealth were taken as evidence of a society that was breeding revolutionary change from within, quite aside from British provocations.
While the concerns of the progressive historians echo in these socioeconomic interpretations of the Revolution, the neoprogressives have been more careful not to reduce the issues simplistically to the one-ring arena of economic self-interest.
Instead, they have argued that the varying material circumstances of American participants led them to hold distinctive versions of republicanism, giving the Revolution a less unified and more complex ideological underpinning than the idealistic historians had previously suggested.
The dialogue between proponents of ideas and interests has gradually led to a more nuanced meeting of the two views.
C HAPTER 7 The Road to Revolution, 17631775 For further reading, see page A4 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  America Secedes from the Empire  17751783 T HOMAS P AINE , D ECEMBER 1776 B loodshed at Lexington and Concord in April of 1775 was a clarion call to arms.
About twenty thousand musket-bearing Minute Men swarmed around Boston, there to coop up the outnumbered British.
The Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia the next month, on May 10, 1775, and this time the full slate of thirteen colonies was represented.
The conservative element in Congress was still strong, despite the shooting in Massachusetts.
There was still no well-defined sentiment for independencemerely a desire to continue fighting in the hope that the king and Parliament would consent to a redress of grievances.
Congress hopefully drafted new appeals to the British people and kingappeals that were spurned.
Anticipating a possible rebuff, the delegates also adopted measures to raise money and to create an army and a navy.
The British and the Americans now teetered on the brink of all-out warfare.
Perhaps the most important single action of the Congress was to select George Washington, one of its members already in officers uniform, to head the hastily improvised army besieging Boston.
This choice was made with considerable misgivings.
The tall, powerfully built, dignified Virginia planter, then forty-three, had never risen above the rank of a colonel in the militia.
His largest command had numbered only twelve hundred men, and that had been some twenty years earlier.
Falling short of true military genius, Washington would actually lose more pitched battles than he won.
But the distinguished Virginian was gifted with outstanding powers of leadership and immense strength of character.
He radiated patience, courage, self-discipline, and a sense of justice.
He was a great moral force rather than a great military minda symbol and a rallying point.
People instinctively trusted him; they sensed that when he put himself at the head of a cause, he was prepared, if necessary, to go down with the ship.
He insisted on serving without pay, though he kept a careful expense account amounting to more than $100,000.
Later he sternly reprimanded his steward at Mount Vernon for providing the enemy, under duress, with supplies.
He would have preferred instead to see the enemy put the torch to his mansion.
The Continental Congress, though dimly perceiving Washingtons qualities of leadership, chose more wisely than it knew.
His selection, in truth, was largely political.
Americans in other sections, already jealous, were beginning to distrust the large New England army being collected around Boston.
Prudence suggested a commander from Virginia, the largest and most populous of the colonies.
As a man of wealth, both by inheritance and by marriage, Washington could not be accused of being a fortune seeker.
As an aristocrat, he could be counted on by his peers to check the excesses of the masses.
The clash of arms continued on a strangely contradictory basis.
On the one hand, the Americans were emphatically affirming their loyalty to the king and earnestly voicing their desire to patch up difficulties.
On the other hand, they were raising armies and shooting down His Majestys soldiers.
This curious war of inconsistency was fought for fourteen long monthsfrom April 1775 to July 1776before the fateful plunge into independence was taken.
Gradually the tempo of warfare increased.
In May 1775 a tiny American force under Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold surprised and captured the British garrisons at Ticonderoga and Crown Point, on the scenic lakes of upper New York.
A priceless store of gunpowder and artillery for the siege of Boston was thus secured.
In June 1775 the colonists seized a hill, now known as Bunker Hill (actually Breeds Hill), from which they menaced the enemy in Boston.
The British, instead of cutting off the retreat of their foes by flanking them, blundered bloodily when they launched a frontal attack with three thouC HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 sand men.
Sharpshooting Americans, numbering fifteen hundred and strongly entrenched, mowed down the advancing redcoats with frightful slaughter.
But the colonists scanty store of gunpowder finally gave out, and they were forced to abandon  the hill in disorder.
With two more such victories, remarked the French foreign minister, the British would have no army left in America.
Even at this late date, in July 1775, the Continental Congress adopted the Olive Branch Petition, professing American loyalty to the crown and begging the king to prevent further hostilities.
But following Bunker Hill, King George III slammed the door on all hope of reconciliation.
In August 1775 he formally proclaimed the colonies in rebellion; the skirmishes were now out and out treason, a hanging crime.
The next month he widened the chasm when he sealed arrangements for hiring thousands of German troops to help crush his rebellious subjects.
Six German princes involved in the transaction needed the money (one reputedly had seventy-four children); George III needed the men.
Because most of these soldiers-for-hire came from the German principality of Hesse, the Americans called all the European mercenaries Hessians.
News of the Hessian deal shocked the colonists.
The quarrel, they felt, was within the family.
Why bring in outside mercenaries, especially foreigners who had an exaggerated reputation for butchery?
Hessian hirelings proved to be good soldiers in a mechanical sense, but many of them were more interested in booty than in duty.
For good reason they were dubbed Hessian flies.
Seduced by American promises of land, hundreds of them finally deserted and remained in America to become respected citizens.
The unsheathed sword continued to take its toll.
In October 1775, on the eve of a cruel winter, the British burned Falmouth (Portland), Maine.
In that same autumn, the rebels daringly undertook a twopronged invasion of Canada.
American leaders believed, erroneously, that the conquered French were explosively restive under the British yoke.
A successful assault on Canada would add a fourteenth colony, while depriving Britain of a valuable base for striking at the colonies in revolt.
But this large-scale attack, involving some two thousand American troops, contradicted the claim of the colonists that they were merely fighting defensively for a redress of grievances.
Invasion northward was undisguised offensive warfare.
This bold stroke for Canada narrowly missed success.
One invading column under the Irish-born General Richard Montgomery, formerly of the British army, pushed up the Lake Champlain route and captured Montreal.
He was joined at Quebec by the bedraggled army of General Benedict Arnold, whose men had been reduced to eating dogs and shoe leather during their grueling march through the Maine woods.
An assault on Quebec, launched on the last day of 1775, was beaten off.
The able Montgomery was killed; the dashing Arnold was wounded in one leg.
Scattered remnants under his command retreated up the St.
Lawrence River, reversing the way Montgomery had come.
French-Canadian leaders, who had been generously treated by the British in the Quebec Act of 1774, showed no real desire to welcome the plundering anti-Catholic invaders.
Bitter fighting persisted in the colonies, though the Americans continued to disclaim all desire for independence.
In January 1776 the British set fire to the Virginia town of Norfolk.
In March they were finally forced to evacuate Boston, taking with them the leading friends of the king.
(Evacuation Day is still celebrated annually in Boston.
) In the South the rebellious colonists won two victories in 1776one in February against some fifteen hundred Loyalists at Moores Creek Bridge in North Carolina, and the other in June against an invading British fleet at Charleston harbor.
Why did Americans continue to deny any intention of independence?
Loyalty to the empire was deeply ingrained; many Americans continued to consider themselves part of a transatlantic community in which the mother country of Britain played a leading role; colonial unity was poor; and open rebellion was dangerous, especially against a formidable Britain.
Irish rebels of that day were customarily hanged, drawn, and quartered.
American rebels might have fared no better.
As late as January 1776 five months before independence was declared the kings health was being toasted by the officers  of Washingtons mess near Boston.
God save the king had not yet been replaced by God save the  Congress.
C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Albany Boston Newburyport Ft.
Ticonderoga Crown Point Montreal Quebec Falmouth   (Portland) Arnold's route, 1775 Montgomery's route, 1775 Revolution in the North, 17751776 Benedict Arnolds troops were described as pretty young men when they sailed from Massachusetts.
They were considerably less pretty on their arrival in Quebec, after eight weeks of struggling through wet and frigid forests, often without food.
No one can imagine, one of them wrote, the sweetness of a roasted shot-pouch [ammunition bag] to the famished appetite.
Gradually the Americans were shocked into an awareness of their inconsistency.
Their eyes were jolted open by harsh British acts like the burning of Falmouth and Norfolk, and especially by the hiring of the Hessians.
Then in 1776 came the publication of  written.
Its author was the radical Thomas Paine, once an impoverished corset-makers apprentice, who had come over from Britain a year earlier.
His tract became a whirlwind best-seller and within a few months reached the astonishing total of 120,000 copies.
Paine flatly branded the shilly-shallying of the colonists as contrary to common sense.
Why not throw off the cloak of inconsistency?
Nowhere in the physical universe did the smaller heavenly body control the larger one.
Then why should the tiny island of Britain control the vast continent of America?
As for the king, whom the Americans professed to revere, he was nothing but the Royal Brute of Great Britain.
Paines passionate protest was as compelling as it was eloquent and radicaleven doubly radical.
It called not simply for independence, but for the creation of a new kind of political society, a  where power flowed from the people themselves, not from a corrupt and despotic monarch.
In language laced with biblical imagery familiar to common folk, he argued that all government officials governors, senators, and judgesnot just representatives in a house of commons, should derive their authority from popular consent.
Paine was hardly the first person to champion a republican form of government.
Political philosophers had advanced the idea since the days of classical Greece and Rome.
Revived in the Renaissance and in seventeenth-century England, republican ideals had uneasily survived within the British mixed government, with its delicate balance of king, nobility, and commons.
Republicanism particularly appealed to British politicians critical of excessive power in the hands of the king and his advisers.
Their writings found a responsive audience among the American colonists, who interThe nearer any government approaches to a republic the less business there is for a king.
It is somewhat difficult to find a proper name for the government of England.
Sir William Meredith calls it a republic; but in its present state it is unworthy of the name, because the corrupt influence of the crown, by having all the places in its disposal, hath so effectively swallowed up the power, and eaten out the virtue of the house of commons (the republican part of the constitution) that the government of England is nearly as monarchical as that  of France or Spain.
preted the vengeful royal acts of the previous decade as part of a monarchical conspiracy to strip them of their liberties as British subjects.
Paines radical prescription for the coloniesto reject monarchy and empire and embrace an independent republicfell on receptive ears.
The colonists experience with governance had prepared them well for Paines summons to create a republic.
Many settlers, particularly New Englanders, had practiced a kind of republicanism in their democratic town meetings and annual elections, while the popularly elected committees of correspondence during 1774 and 1775 had demonstrated the feasibility of republican government.
The absence of a hereditary aristocracy and the relative equality of condition enjoyed by landowning farmers meshed well with the republican repudiation of a fixed hierarchy of power.
Most Americans considered citizen virtue fundamental to any successful republican government.
Because political power no longer rested with the central, all-powerful authority of the king, individuals in a republic needed to sacrifice their personal self-interest to the public good.
The collective good of the people mattered more than the private rights and interests of individuals.
Paine inspired his contemporaries to view America as fertile ground for the cultivation of such civic virtue.
Yet not all Patriots agreed with Paines ultrademocratic approach to republicanism.
Some favored a republic ruled by a natural aristocracy of talent.
Republicanism for them meant an end to hereditary aristocracy, but not an end to all social hierarchy.
These more conservative republicans feared that the fervor for liberty would overwhelm the stability of the social order.
They watched with trepidation as the lower orders of societypoorer farmers, tenants, and laboring classes in towns and citiesseemed to embrace a kind of runaway republicanism that amounted to radical leveling.
The contest to define the nature of American republicanism would noisily continue for the next hundred years.
Members of the Philadelphia Congress, instructed by their respective colonies, gradually edged toward a clean break.
On June 7, 1776, fiery Richard Henry Lee of Virginia moved that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states.
After considerable debate, the motion was adopted nearly a month later, on July 2, 1776.
The passing of Lees resolution was the formal declaration of independence by the American colonies, and technically this was all that was needed to cut the British tie.
John Adams wrote confidently that ever thereafter, July 2 would be celebrated annually with fireworks.
But something more was required.
An epochal rupture of this kind called for some formal explanation.
An inspirational appeal was also needed to enlist other British colonies in the Americas, to invite assistance from foreign nations, and to rally resistance at home.
C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 In the midst of the revolutionary fervor of 1776, at least one womanAbigail Adams, wife of noted Massachusetts Patriot (and future president) John Adamsraised her voice on behalf of women.
Yet she apparently raised it only in privatein this personal letter to her husband.
Private documents like the correspondence and diaries of individuals both prominent and ordinary offer invaluable sources for the historian seeking  to discover sentiments, opinions, and perspectives that are often difficult to discern in the official public record.
What might it suggest about the historical circumstances of the 1770s that Abigail Adams confined her claim for womens equality to this confidential exchange with her spouse?
What might have inspired the arguments she employed?
Despite her privileged position and persuasive power, and despite her threat to foment a rebellion, Abigail Adamss plea went largely unheeded in the Revolutionary eraas did comparable pleadings to extend the revolutionary principle of equality to blacks.
What might have accounted for this limited application of the ideas of liberty and equality in the midst of a supposedly democratic revolution?
Shortly after Lee made his memorable motion on June 7, Congress appointed a committee to prepare an appropriate statement.
The task of drafting it fell to Thomas Jefferson, a tall, freckled, sandy-haired Virginia lawyer of thirty-three.
Despite his youth,  he was already recognized as a brilliant writer,  and he measured up splendidly to the awesome assignment.
After some debate and amendment, the Declaration of Independence was formally approved by the Congress on July 4, 1776.
It might better have been called the Explanation of Independence or, as one contemporary described it, Mr.
Jeffersons advertisement of Mr.
Lees resolution.
Jeffersons pronouncement, couched in a lofty style, was magnificent.
He gave his appeal universality by invoking the natural rights of humankind not just British rights.
He argued persuasively that because the king had flouted these rights, the colonists were justified in cutting their connection.
He then set forth a long list of the presumably tyrannous misdeeds of George III.
The overdrawn bill of indictment included imposing taxes without consent, dispensing with trial by jury, abolishing valued laws, establishing a military dictatorship, maintaining standing armies in peacetime, cutting off trade, burning towns, hiring mercenaries, and inciting hostility among the Indians.
* Jeffersons withering blast was admittedly onesided.
But he was in effect the prosecuting attorney, and he took certain liberties with historical truth.
He was not writing history; he was making it through what has been called the worlds greatest editorial.
He owned many slaves, and his affirmation that all men are created equal was to haunt him and his fellow citizens for generations.
The formal Declaration of Independence cleared the air as a thundershower does on a muggy day.
Foreign aid could be solicited with greater hope of success.
Those Patriots who defied the king were now rebels, not loving subjects shooting their way into reconciliation.
They must all hang together, Franklin is said to have grimly remarked, or they would all hang separately.
Or, in the eloquent language of the great declaration, We mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor.
Jeffersons defiant Declaration of Independence had a universal impact unmatched by any other American document.
This shout heard round the world has been a source of inspiration to countless revolutionary movements against arbitrary authority.
Lafayette hung a copy on a wall in his home, leaving beside it room for a future French Declaration of the Rights of Mana declaration that was officially born thirteen years later.
The War of Independence, strictly speaking, was a war within a war.
Colonials loyal to the king (Loyalists) fought the American rebels (Patriots), while the rebels also fought the British redcoats (see Makers of America: The Loyalists, pp.
150151).
Loyalists were derisively called Tories, after the dominant political factions in Britain, whereas Patriots were called Whigs, after the opposition factions in Britain.
A popular definition of a Tory among the Patriots betrayed bitterness: A Tory is a thing whose head is in England, and its body in America, and its neck ought to be stretched.
Like many revolutions, the American Revolution was a minority movement.
Many colonists were apathetic or neutral, including the Byrds of Virginia, who sat on the fence.
The opposing forces contended not only against each other but also for the allegiance and support of the civilian population.
In this struggle for the hearts and minds of the people, C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 .
[You] are to be hanged by the neck, but not until you are dead; for while you are still living your bodies are to be taken down, your bowels torn out and burned before your faces, your heads then cut off, and your bodies divided each into four quarters, and your heads and quarters to be then at the Kings disposal; and may the Almighty God have mercy on your souls.
*For an annotated text of the Declaration of Independence, see the Appendix.
the British proved fatally inept, and the Patriot militias played a crucial role.
The British military proved able to control only those areas where it could maintain a massive military presence.
Elsewhere, as soon as the redcoats had marched on, the rebel militiamen appeared and took up the task of political educationsometimes by coercive means.
Often lacking bayonets but always loaded with political zeal, the ragtag militia units served as remarkably effective agents of Revolutionary ideas.
They convinced many colonists, even those indifferent to independence, that the British army was an unreliable friend and that they had better throw in their lot with the Patriot cause.
They also mercilessly harassed small British detachments and occupation forces.
One British officer ruefully observed that the Americans would be less dangerous if they had a regular army.
Loyalists, numbering perhaps 16 percent of the American people, remained true to their king.
Families often split over the issue of independence: Benjamin Franklin supported the Patriot side, whereas his handsome illegitimate son, William Franklin (the last royal governor of New Jersey), upheld the Loyalist cause.
The Loyalists were tragic figures.
For generations the British in the New World had been taught fidelity to the crown.
Loyalty is ordinarily regarded as a major virtueloyalty to ones family, ones friends, ones country.
If the king had triumphed, as he seemed likely to do, the Loyalists would have been acclaimed patriots, and defeated rebels like Washington would have been disgraced, severely punished, and probably forgotten.
Many people of education and wealth, of culture and caution, remained loyal.
These wary souls were satisfied with their lot and believed that any violent change would only be for the worse.
Loyalists were also more numerous among the older generation.
Young people make revolutions, and from the outset energetic, purposeful, and militant young people surged forwardfigures like the sleeplessly scheming Samuel Adams and the impassioned Patrick Henry.
His flaming outcry before the Virginia AssemblyGive me liberty or give me death!
still quickens patriotic pulses.
Loyalists also included the kings officers and other beneficiaries of the crownpeople who knew which side their daily bread came from.
The same was generally true of the Anglican clergy and a large portion of their congregations, all of whom had long been taught submission to the king.
Usually the Loyalists were most numerous where the Anglican church was strongest.
A notable exception was Virginia, where the debt-burdened Anglican aristocrats flocked into the rebel camp.
The kings followers were well entrenched in aristocratic New York City and Charleston, and also in n late 1776 Catherine Van Cortlandt wrote to her husband, a New Jersey merchant fighting in a Loyalist brigade, about the Patriot troops who had quartered themselves in her house.
They were the most disorderly of species, she complained, and their officers were from the dregs of the people.
Like the Van Cortlandts, many Loyalists thought of themselves as the better sort of people.
They viewed their adversaries as lawless mobs and brutes.
Conservative, wealthy, and well-educated, Loyalists of this breed thought a break with Britain would invite anarchy.
Loyalism made sense to them, too, for practical reasons.
Viewing colonial militias as no match for His Majestys army, Loyalist pamphleteer Daniel Leonard warned his Patriot enemies in 1775 that nothing short of a miracle could gain you one battle.
But Loyalism was hardly confined to the wellto-do.
It also appealed to many people of modest means who identified strongly with Britain or who had reason to fear a Patriot victory.
Thousands of British veterans of the Seven Years War, for example, had settled in the colonies after 1763.
Many of them took up farming on two-hundred-acre land grants in New York.
They were loath to turn their backs on the crown.
So, too, were recent immigrants from non-English regions of the British Isles, especially from Scotland and Ireland, who had settled in Georgia or the backcountry of North and South Carolina.
Many of these newcomers, resenting the plantation elite who ran these colonies, filled the ranks of Tory brigades such as the Volunteers of Ireland and  the North Carolina Highlanders, organized by the British army to galvanize Loyalist support.
Other ethnic minorities found their own reasons to support the British.
Some members of Dutch, German, and French religious sects believed that religious tolerance would be greater under the British than under the Americans, whose prejudices they had already encountered.
Above all, thousands of African-Americans joined Loyalist ranks in the hope that service to the British might offer an escape from bondage.
British officials encouraged that belief.
Throughout the war and in every colony, some African-Americans fled to British lines, where they served as soldiers, servants, laborers, and spies.
Many of them joined black regiments that specialized in making small sorties against Patriot militia.
In Monmouth, New Jersey, the black Loyalist Colonel Tye and his band of raiders became legendary for capturing Patriots and their supplies.
As the war drew to an end in 1783, the fate of black Loyalists varied enormously.
Many thousands who came to Loyalism as fugitive slaves managed to find a way to freedom, most notably the large group who won British passage from the port of New York to Nova Scotia.
Other African-American Loyalists suffered betrayal.
British general Lord Cornwallis abandoned over four thousand former slaves in Virginia, and many black Loyalists who boarded ships from British-controlled ports expecting to embark for freedom instead found themselves sold back into slavery in the West Indies.
White Loyalists faced no threat of enslavement, but they did suffer punishments beyond mere disgrace: arrest, exile, confiscation of property, and loss of legal rights.
Faced with such retribution, some eighty thousand Loyalists fled abroad, mostly to Britain and the maritime provinces of Canada.
Some settled contentedly as exiles, but many, especially those who went to Britain where they had difficulty becoming accepted, lived diminished and lonely livescut off, as Loyalist Thomas Danforth put it, from every hope of importance in life .
[and] in a station much inferior to that of a menial servant.
But most Loyalists remained in America, where they faced the special burdens of reestablishing themselves in a society that viewed them as traitors.
Some succeeded remarkably despite the odds, such as Hugh Gaine, a printer in New York City who eventually reopened a business and even won contracts from the new government.
Ironically, this former Loyalist soldier published the new national army regulations authored by the Revolutionary hero Baron von Steuben.
Like many former Loyalists, Gaine reintegrated himself into public life by siding with the Federalist call for a strong central government and powerful executive.
When New York ratified the Constitution in 1788, Gaine rode the float at the head of the citys celebration parade.
He had, like many other former Loyalists, become an American.
Quaker Pennsylvania and New Jersey, where General Washington felt that he was fighting in the enemys country.
While his men were starving at Valley Forge, nearby Pennsylvania farmers were selling their produce to the British for the kings gold.
Loyalists were least numerous in New England, where self-government was especially strong and mercantilism was especially weak.
Rebels were the most numerous where Presbyterianism and Congregationalism flourished, notably in New England.
Invading British armies vented their contempt and anger by using Yankee churches for pigsties.
Before the Declaration of Independence in 1776, persecution of the Loyalists was relatively mild.
Yet they were subjected to some brutality, including tarring and feathering and riding astride fence rails.
After the Declaration of Independence, which sharply separated Loyalists from Patriots, harsher methods prevailed.
The rebels naturally desired a united front.
Putting loyalty to the colonies first, they regarded their opponents, not themselves, as traitors.
Loyalists were roughly handled, hundreds were imprisoned, and a few noncombatants were hanged.
But there was no wholesale reign of terror comparable to that which later bloodied both France and Russia during their revolutions.
For one thing, the colonists reflected Anglo-Saxon regard for order; for another, the leading Loyalists were prudent enough to flee to the British lines.
About eighty thousand loyal supporters of George III were driven out or fled, but several hundred thousand or so of the mild Loyalists were permitted to stay.
The estates of many of the fugitives were confiscated and solda relatively painless way to help finance the war.
Confiscation often worked great hardship, as, for example, when two aristocratic women were forced to live in their former chicken house for leaning Toryward.
Some fifty thousand Loyalist volunteers at one time or another bore arms for the British.
They also helped the kings cause by serving as spies, by inciting the Indians, and by keeping Patriot soldiers at home to protect their families.
Ardent Loyalists had their hearts in their cause, and a major blunder of the haughty British was not to make full use of them in the fighting.
With Boston evacuated in March 1776, the British concentrated on New York as a base of operations.
Here was a splendid seaport, centrally located, where the king could count on cooperation from the numerous Loyalists.
An awe-inspiring British fleet appeared off New York in July 1776.
It consisted of some five hundred ships and thirty-five thousand menthe largest armed force to be seen in America until the Civil War.
General Washington, dangerously outnumbered, could muster only eighteen thousand ill-trained troops with which to meet the crack army of the invader.
Disaster befell the Americans in the summer and fall of 1776.
Outgeneraled and outmaneuvered, they were routed at the Battle of Long Island, where panic seized the raw recruits.
By the narrowest of margins, and thanks to a favoring wind and fog, Washington escaped to Manhattan Island.
Retreating northward, he crossed the Hudson River to New Jersey and finally reached the Delaware River with the British close at his heels.
Tauntingly, enemy buglers sounded the fox-hunting call, so familiar to Virginians of Washingtons day.
The Patriot cause was at low ebb when the rebel remnants fled across the river after collecting all available boats to forestall pursuit.
The wonder is that Washingtons adversary, General William Howe, did not speedily crush the demoralized American forces.
But he was no military genius, and he well remembered the horrible slaughter at Bunker Hill, where he had commanded.
The country was rough, supplies were slow in coming, and as a professional soldier, Howe did not relish the rigors of winter campaigning.
He evidently found more agreeable the bedtime company of his mistress, the wife of one of his subordinatesa scandal with which American satirists had a good deal of ribald fun.
Washington, who was now almost counted out, stealthily recrossed the ice-clogged Delaware River.
At Trenton, on December 26, 1776, he surprised and captured a thousand Hessians who were sleeping off the effects of their Christmas celebration.
A week later, leaving his campfires burning as a ruse, he slipped away and inflicted a sharp defeat on a smaller British detachment at Princeton.
This brilliant New Jersey campaign, crowned by these two lifesaving victories, revealed Old Fox Washington at his military best.
C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 London officials adopted an intricate scheme for capturing the vital Hudson River valley in 1777.
If successful, the British would sever New England from the rest of the states and paralyze the American cause.
The main invading force, under an actorplaywright-soldier, General (Gentleman Johnny) Burgoyne, would push down the Lake Champlain route from Canada.
General Howes troops in New York, if needed, could advance up the Hudson River to meet Burgoyne near Albany.
A third and much smaller British force, commanded by Colonel Barry St.
Leger, would come in from the west by way of Lake Ontario and the Mohawk Valley.
British planners did not reckon with General Benedict Arnold.
After his repulse at Quebec in 1775, he had retreated slowly along the St.
Lawrence River back to the Lake Champlain area, by heroic efforts keeping an army in the field.
The British had pursued his tattered force to Lake Champlain in 1776.
But they could not move farther south until they had won control of the lake, which, in the absence of roads, was indispensable for carrying their supplies.
While the British stopped to construct a sizeable fleet, tireless Arnold assembled and fitted out every floatable vessel.
His tiny flotilla was finally destroyed after desperate fighting, but time, if not the battle, had been won.
Winter was descending and the British were forced to retire to Canada.
General Burgoyne had to start anew from this base the following year.
If Arnold had not contributed his daring and skill, the British invaders of 1776 almost certainly would have recaptured Fort Ticonderoga.
If Burgoyne had started from this springboard in 1777, instead of from Montreal, he almost certainly would have succeeded in his venture.
(At last the apparently futile American invasion of Canada in 1775 was beginning to pay rich dividends.
) General Burgoyne began his fateful invasion with seven thousand regular troops.
He was encumbered by a heavy baggage train and a considerable number of women, many of whom were wives of his officers.
Progress was painfully slow, for sweaty axmen had to chop a path through the forest, while American militiamen began to gather like hornets on Burgoynes flanks.
General Howe, meanwhile, was causing astonished eyebrows to rise.
At a time when it seemed obvious that he should be starting up the Hudson River from New York to join his slowly advancing colleague, he deliberately embarked with the main British army for an attack on Philadelphia, the rebel capital.
As scholars now know, he wanted to force  a general engagement with Washingtons army, destroy it, and leave the path wide open for Burgoynes thrust.
Howe apparently assumed that he had ample time to assist Burgoyne directly, should he be needed.
General Washington, keeping a wary eye on the British in New York, hastily transferred his army to the vicinity of Philadelphia.
There, late in 1777, he C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Albany Valley Forge Boston Newport New York Philadelphia Ticonderoga West Point Montreal (Oct.
17, 1777) (Aug.
6, 1777) (June 28, 1778) (Sept.
11, 1777) (Oct.
11, 1776) (Oct.
4, 1777) Howe's route to Philadelphia, 1777 St.
Leger's route, 1777 Burgoyne's route, 1777 New YorkPennsylvania Theater, 17771778 Distinguished members of the Continental Congress fled from Philadelphia in near-panic as the British army approached.
Thomas Paine reported that at three oclock in the morning, the streets were as full of Men, Women, and Children as on a Market Day.
John Adams had anticipated that I shall run away, I suppose, with the rest, since we are too brittle ware, you know, to stand the dashing of balls and bombs.
Adams got his chance to decamp with the others into the interior of Pennsylvania and tried to put the best face on things.
This tour, he commented, has given me an opportunity of seeing many parts of this country which I never saw before.
was defeated in two pitched battles, at Brandywine Creek and Germantown.
Pleasure-loving General Howe then settled down comfortably in the lively capital, leaving Burgoyne to flounder through the wilds of upper New York.
Benjamin Franklin, recently sent to Paris as an envoy, truthfully jested that Howe had not captured Philadelphia but that Philadelphia had captured Howe.
Washington finally retired to winter quarters at Valley Forge, a strong, hilly position some twenty miles northwest of Philadelphia.
There his frostbitten and hungry men were short of about everything except misery.
This rabble was nevertheless whipped into a professional army by the recently arrived Prussian drillmaster, the profane but patient Baron von Steuben.
Burgoyne meanwhile had begun to bog down north of Albany, while a host of American militiamen, scenting the kill, swarmed about him.
In a series of sharp engagements, in which General Arnold was again shot in the leg at Quebec, the British army was trapped.
Meanwhile, the Americans had driven back St.
Legers force at Oriskany.
Unable to advance or retreat, Burgoyne was forced to surrender his entire command at Saratoga on October 17, 1777, to the American general Horatio Gates.
Saratoga ranks high among the decisive battles of both American and world history.
The victory immensely revived the faltering colonial cause.
Even more important, it made possible the urgently needed foreign aid from France, which in turn helped ensure American independence.
France, thirsting for revenge against Britain, was eager to inflame the quarrel that had broken out in America.
The New World colonies were by far Britains most valuable overseas possessions.
If they could be wrestled from Britain, it presumably would cease to be a front-rank power.
France might then regain its former position and prestige, the loss of which in the recent Seven Years War rankled deeply.
Americas cause rapidly became something of a fad in France.
The bored aristocracy, which had developed some interest in the writings of liberal French thinkers like Rousseau, was rather intrigued by the ideal of American liberty.
Hardheaded French officials, on the other hand, were not prompted by a love for America, but by a realistic concern for the interests of France.
Any marriage with America would be strictly one of convenience.
After the shooting at Lexington in April 1775, French agents undertook to blow on the embers.
They secretly provided the Americans with lifesaving supplies of firearms and gunpowder, chiefly through a sham company rigged up for that purpose.
About 90 percent of all the gunpowder used by the Americans in the first two and a half years of the war came from French arsenals.
Secrecy enshrouded all these French schemes.
Open aid to the American rebels might provoke Britain into a declaration of war, and France, still weakened by its recent defeat, was not ready to fight.
It feared that the American rebellion might fade out, for the colonies were proclaiming their desire to patch up differences.
But the Declaration of Independence in 1776 showed that the Americans really meant business, and the smashing  victory at Saratoga seemed to indicate that the revolutionaries had an excellent chance of winning their freedom.
After the humiliation at Saratoga in 1777, the British Parliament belatedly passed a measure that in effect offered the Americans home rule within the empire.
This was essentially all that the colonials had ever asked forexcept independence.
If the French were going to break up the British Empire, they would have to bestir themselves.
Wily and bespectacled old Benjamin Franklin, whose simple fur cap and witty sayings had captivated the French public, played skillfully on Frances fears of  reconciliation.
[We] kept upon our parade in groups, venting our spleen at our country and government, then at our officers, and then at ourselves for our imbecility in staying there and starving in detail for an ungrateful people who did not care what became of us, so they could enjoy themselves while we were keeping a cruel enemy from them.
The French king, Louis XVI, was reluctant to intervene.
Although somewhat stupid, he was alert enough to see grave dangers in aiding the Americans openly and incurring war with Britain.
But his ministers at length won him over.
They argued that hostilities were inevitable, sooner or later, to undo the victors peace of 1763.
If Britain should regain its colonies, it might join with them to seize the sugarrich French West Indies and thus secure compensation for the cost of the recent rebellion.
The French had better fight while they could have an American ally, rather than wait and fight both Britain and its reunited colonies.
So France, in 1778, offered the Americans a treaty of alliance.
Their treaty promised everything that Britain was offeringplus independence.
Both allies bound themselves to wage war until the United States had won its freedom and until both agreed to terms with the common foe.
This was the first entangling military alliance in the experience of the Republic and one that later caused prolonged trouble.
The American people, with ingrained isolationist tendencies, accepted the French entanglement with distaste.
They were painfully aware that it bound them to a hereditary foe that was also a Roman Catholic power.
But when ones house is on fire, one does not inquire too closely into the background of those who carry the water buckets.
England and France thus came to blows in 1778, and the shot fired at Lexington rapidly widened into a global conflagration.
Spain entered the fray against Britain in 1779, as did Holland.
Combined Spanish and French fleets outnumbered those of Britain, and on two occasions the British Isles seemed to be at the mercy of hostile warships.
The weak maritime neutrals of Europe, who had suffered from Britains dominance over the seas, C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Who would have thought that the American colonies, imperfectly known in Europe a few years ago and claimed by every pettifogging lawyer in the House of Commons, every cobbler in the beer-houses of London, as a part of their property, should to-day receive an ambassador from the most powerful monarchy in Europe.
Ireland (restive) Russia, 1780 Denmark-Norway, 1780 Members of the Sweden, 1780 Armed Neutrality Holy Roman Empire, 1781 (with dates of  Prussia, 1782 joining) Portugal, 1782 Two Sicilies, 1783 (after peace signed) Great Britain United States, 17751783 Some Loyalists and Indians Belligerents France, 17781783 30,000 hired Hessians ( Spain, 17791783 Holland, 17791783 { { now began to demand more respect for their rights.
In 1780 the imperious Catherine the Great of Russia took the lead in organizing the Armed Neutrality, which she later sneeringly called the Armed Nullity.
It lined up almost all the remaining European neutrals in an attitude of passive hostility toward Britain.
The war was now being fought not only in Europe and North America, but also in South America, the Caribbean, and Asia.
To say that America, with some French aid, defeated Britain is like saying, Daddy and I killed the bear.
To Britain, struggling for its very life, the scuffle in the New World became secondary.
The Americans deserve credit for having kept the war going until 1778, with secret French aid.
But they did not achieve their independence until the conflict erupted into a multipower world war that was too big for Britain to handle.
From 1778 to 1783, France provided the rebels with guns, money, immense amounts of equipment, about one-half of Americas regular armed forces, and practically all of the new nations naval strength.
Frances entrance into the conflict forced the British to change their basic strategy in America.
Hitherto they could count on blockading the colonial coast and commanding the seas.
Now the French had powerful fleets in American waters, chiefly to protect their own valuable West Indies islands, but in a position to jeopardize Britains blockade and lines of supply.
The British therefore decided to evacuate Philadelphia and concentrate their strength in New York City.
In June 1778 the withdrawing redcoats were attacked by General Washington at Monmouth, New Jersey, on a blisteringly hot day.
Scores of men collapsed or died from sunstroke.
But the battle was indecisive, and the British escaped to New York, although about one-third of their Hessians deserted.
Henceforth, except for the Yorktown interlude of 1781, Washington remained in the New York area hemming in the British.
In the summer of 1780, a powerful French army of six thousand regular troops, commanded by the Comte de Rochambeau, arrived in Newport, Rhode Island.
The Americans were somewhat suspicious of their former enemies; in fact, several ugly flare-ups, involving minor bloodshed, had already occurred between the new allies.
But French gold and goodwill melted hard hearts.
Dancing parties were arranged with the prim Puritan maidens; one French officer related, doubtless with exaggeration, The simple innocence of the Garden of Eden prevailed.
No real military advantage came immediately from this French reinforcement, although preparations were made for a Franco-American attack on New York.
Improving American morale was staggered later in 1780, when General Benedict Arnold turned traitor.
A leader of undoubted dash and brilliance, he was ambitious, greedy, unscrupulous, and suffering from a well-grounded but petulant feeling that his valuable services were not fully appreciated.
He plotted with the British to sell out the key stronghold of West Point, which commanded the Hudson River, for 6,300 and an officers commission.
By  the sheerest accident, the plot was detected in  the nick of time, and Arnold fled to the British.
Whom can we trust now?
cried General Washington in anguish.
The British meanwhile had devised a plan to roll up the colonies, beginning with the South, where the Loyalists were numerous.
The colony of Savannah (U.S.
surrender, Oct.
9, 1779) Charleston (U.S.
surrender, May 12, 1780) Yorktown (Cornwallis's surrender, Oct.
19, 1781) Wilmington Charlottesville Jamestown (U.S.
victory, Oct.
7, 1780) (U.S.
victory, Jan.
17, 1780) VIRGINIA GEORGIA SOUTH  CAROLINA NORTH  CAROLINA Cornwallis's route War in the South, 17801781 Georgia was ruthlessly overrun in 17781779; Charleston, South Carolina, fell in 1780.
The surrender of the city to the British involved the capture of five thousand men and four hundred cannon and was a heavier loss to the Americans, in relation to existing strength, than that of Burgoyne was to the British.
Warfare now intensified in the Carolinas, where Patriots bitterly fought their Loyalist neighbors.
It was not uncommon for prisoners on both sides to be butchered in cold blood after they had thrown down their arms.
The tide turned later in 1780 and early in 1781, when American riflemen wiped out a British detachment at Kings Mountain and then defeated a smaller force at Cowpens.
In the Carolina campaign of 1781, General Nathanael Greene, a Quaker-reared tactician, distinguished himself by his strategy of delay.
Standing and then retreating, he exhausted his foe, General Charles Cornwallis, in vain pursuit.
By losing battles but winning campaigns, the Fighting Quaker finally succeeded in clearing most of Georgia and South Carolina of British troops.
The West was ablaze during much of the war.
Indian allies of George III, hoping to protect their land, were busy with torch and tomahawk; they were egged on by British agents branded as hair buyers because they allegedly paid bounties for American scalps.
Fateful 1777 was known as the bloody year on the frontier.
Although two nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, the Oneidas and the Tuscaroras, sided with the Americans, the Senecas, Mohawks, Cayugas, and Onondagas joined the British.
They were urged on by Mohawk chief Joseph Brant, a convert to Anglicanism who believed, not without reason, that a victorious Britain would restrain American expansion into the West.
Brant and the British ravaged large areas of backcountry Pennsylvania and New York until checked by an American force in 1779.
In 1784 the pro-British Iroquois were forced to sign the Treaty of Fort Stanwix, the first treaty between the United States and an Indian nation.
Under its terms the Indians ceded most of their land.
C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Vincennes Detroit Fort Pitt Cahokia Kaskaskia George Rogers Clarks Campaign, 17781779 Yet even in wartime, the human tide of westward-moving pioneers did not halt its flow.
Eloquent testimony is provided by place names in Kentucky, such as Lexington (named after the battle) and Louisville (named after Americas new ally, Louis XVI).
In the wild Illinois country, the British were especially vulnerable to attack, for they held only scattered posts that they had captured from the French.
An audacious frontiersman, George Rogers Clark, conceived the idea of seizing these forts by surprise.
In 17781779 he floated down the Ohio River with about 175 men and captured in quick succession the forts Kaskaskia, Cahokia, and Vincennes.
Clarks admirers have argued, without positive proof, that his success forced the British to cede the region north of the Ohio River to the United States at the peace table in Paris.
Americas infant navy had meanwhile been laying the foundations of a brilliant tradition.
The naval establishment consisted of only a handful of nondescript ships, commanded by daring officers, the most famous of whom was a hard-fighting young Scotsman, John Paul Jones.
As events turned out, this tiny naval force never made a real dent in Britains thunderous fleets.
Its chief contribution was in destroying British merchant shipping and thus carrying the war into the waters around the British Isles.
More numerous and damaging than ships of the regular American navy were swift privateers.
These craft were privately owned armed shipslegalized pirates in a sensespecifically authorized by Congress to prey on enemy shipping.
Altogether over a thousand American privateers, responding to the call of patriotism and profit, sallied forth with about seventy thousand men (sailors of fortune).
They captured some six hundred British prizes, while British warships captured about as many American merchantmen and privateers.
Privateering was not an unalloyed asset.
It had the unfortunate effect of diverting manpower from the main war effort and involving Americans, including Benedict Arnold, in speculation and graft.
But the privateers brought in urgently needed gold, harassed the enemy, and raised American morale by providing victories at a time when victories were few.
British shipping was so badly riddled by privateers and by the regular American navy that insurance rates skyrocketed.
Merchant ships were compelled to sail in convoy, and British shippers and manufacturers brought increasing pressure on Parliament to end the war on honorable terms.
One of the darkest periods of the war was 17801781, before the last decisive victory.
Inflation of the currency continued at full gallop.
The government, virtually bankrupt, declared that it would repay many of its debts at the rate of only 2.5 cents on the dollar.
Despair prevailed, the sense of unity withered, and mutinous sentiments infected the army.
Meanwhile, the British general Cornwallis was blundering into a trap.
After futile operations in Virginia, he had fallen back to Chesapeake Bay at  Yorktown to await seaborne supplies and reinforcements.
He assumed Britain would continue to control the sea.
But these few fateful weeks happened to be one of the brief periods during the war when British naval superiority slipped away.
The French were now prepared to cooperate energetically in a brilliant stroke.
Admiral de Grasse, operating with a powerful fleet in the West Indies, advised the Americans that he was free to join with them in an assault on Cornwallis at Yorktown.
Quick to seize this opportunity, General Washington made a swift march of more than three hundred miles to The genius of this nation is not in the least to be compared with that of the Prussians, Austrians, or French.
You say to your soldier, Do this and he doeth it; but I am obliged to say, This is the reason why you ought to do that, and then he does it.
the Chesapeake from the New York area.
Accompanied by Rochambeaus French army, Washington beset the British by land, while de Grasse blockaded them by sea after beating off the British fleet.
Completely cornered, Cornwallis surrendered his entire force of seven thousand men on October 19, 1781, as his band appropriately played The World Turnd Upside Down.
The triumph was no less French than American: the French provided essentially all the sea power and about half of the regular troops in the besieging army of some sixteen thousand men.
Stunned by news of the disaster, Prime Minister Lord North cried, Oh God!
Its all over!
Its all over!
But it was not.
George III stubbornly planned to continue the struggle, for Britain was far from being crushed.
It still had fifty-four thousand troops in North America, including thirty-two thousand in the United States.
Washington returned with his army to New York, there to continue keeping a vigilant eye on the British force of ten thousand men.
Fighting actually continued for more than a year after Yorktown, with Patriot-Loyalist warfare in the South especially savage.
No quarter for Tories was the common battle cry.
One of Washingtons most valuable contributions was to keep the languishing cause alive, the army in the field, and the states together during these critical months.
Otherwise a satisfactory peace treaty might never have been signed.
After Yorktown, despite George IIIs obstinate eagerness to continue fighting, many Britons were weary of war and increasingly ready to come to terms.
They had suffered heavy reverses in India and in the West Indies.
The island of Minorca in the Mediterranean had fallen; the Rock of Gibraltar was tottering.
Lord Norths ministry collapsed in March 1782, temporarily ending the personal rule of George III.
A Whig ministry, rather favorable to the Americans, replaced the Tory regime of Lord North.
Three American peace negotiators had meanwhile gathered at Paris: the aging but astute Benjamin Franklin; the flinty John Adams, vigilant for C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Knavery seems to be so much the striking feature of its inhabitants that it may not in the end be an evil that they become aliens to this Kingdom.
New England interests; and the impulsive John Jay of New York, deeply suspicious of Old World intrigue.
The three envoys had explicit instructions from Congress to make no separate peace and to consult with their French allies at all stages of the negotiations.
But the American representatives chafed under this directive.
They well knew that it had been written by a subservient Congress, with the French Foreign Office indirectly guiding the pen.
France was in a painful position.
It had induced Spain to enter the war on its side, in part by promising to deliver British-held Gibraltar.
Yet the towering rock was defying frantic joint assaults by French and Spanish troops.
Spain also coveted the immense trans-Allegheny area, on which restless American pioneers were already settling.
France, ever eager to smash Britains empire, desired an independent United States, but one independent in the abstract, not in action.
It therefore schemed to keep the new republic cooped up east of the Allegheny Mountains.
A weak America like a horse sturdy enough to plow but not vigorous enough to kickwould be easier to manage in  promoting French interests and policy.
France was paying a heavy price in men and treasure to win Americas independence, and it wanted to get its moneys worth.
But John Jay was unwilling to play Frances game.
Suspiciously alert, he perceived that the French could not satisfy the conflicting ambitions of both Americans and Spaniards.
He saw signsor thought he didindicating that the Paris Foreign Office was about to betray Americas transAllegheny interests to satisfy those of Spain.
He therefore secretly made separate overtures to London, contrary to his instructions from Congress.
The hard-pressed British, eager to entice one of their enemies from the alliance, speedily came to terms with the Americans.
A preliminary treaty of peace was signed in 1782; the final peace, the next year.
By the Treaty of Paris of 1783, the British formally recognized the independence of the United States.
In addition, they granted generous boundaries, stretching majestically to the Mississippi on the west, to the Great Lakes on the north, and to Spanish Florida on the south.
(Spain had recently captured Florida from Britain.
) The Yankees, though now divorced from the empire, were to retain a share in the priceless fisheries of Newfoundland.
The Canadians, of course, were profoundly  displeased.
The Americans, on their part, had to yield important concessions.
Loyalists were not to be further persecuted, and Congress was to  the state legislatures that confiscated Loyalist property be restored.
As for the debts long owed to British creditors, the states vowed to put no lawful obstacles in the way of their collection.
Unhappily for future harmony, the assurances regarding both Loyalists and debts were not carried out in the manner hoped for by London.
Britains terms were liberal almost beyond belief.
The enormous trans-Allegheny area was thrown in as a virtual gift, for George Rogers Clark had captured only a small segment of it.
Why the generosity?
Had the United States beaten Britain to its knees?
The key to the riddle may be found in the Old World.
At the time the peace terms were drafted, Britain was trying to seduce America from its French alliance, so it made the terms as alluring as possible.
The shaky Whig ministry, hanging on by its fingernails for only a few months, was more friendly to the Americans than were the Tories.
It was determined, by a policy of liberality, to salve recent wounds, reopen old trade channels, and prevent future wars over the coveted trans-Allegheny region.
This far-visioned policy was regrettably not followed by the successors of the Whigs.
In spirit, the Americans made a separate peacecontrary to the French alliance.
In fact, they did not.
The Paris Foreign Office formally approved the terms of peace, though disturbed by the lonewolf course of its American ally.
France was immensely relieved by the prospect of bringing the costly conflict to an end and of freeing itself from its embarrassing promises to the Spanish crown.
America alone gained from the world-girdling war.
The British, though soon to stage a comeback, were battered and beaten.
The French savored sweet revenge but plunged headlong down the slippery slope to bankruptcy and revolution.
In truth, fortune smiled benignly on the Americans.
Snatching their independence from the furnace of world conflict, they began their national career with a splendid territorial birthright and a priceless heritage of freedom.
Seldom, if ever, have any people been so favored.
C HAPTER 8 America Secedes from the Empire, 17751783 Battles of Lexington and Concord Second Continental Congress Americans capture British garrisons at  Ticonderoga and Crown Point Battle of Bunker Hill King George III formally proclaims  colonies in rebellion Failed invasion of Canada Paine's  Declaration of Independence Battle of Trenton Battle of Brandywine Battle of Germantown Battle of Saratoga Formation of French-American alliance Battle of Monmouth Clarks victories in the West Battle of Kings Mountain Battle of Cowpens Greene leads Carolina campaign French and Americans force Cornwallis to surrender at Yorktown Norths ministry collapses in Britain Treaty of Paris Treaty of Fort Stanwix For further reading, see page A5 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  B UILDING THE N EW N ATION  17761860 B y 1783 Americans had won their freedom.
Now they had to build their country.
To be sure, they were blessed with a vast and fertile land, and they inherited from their colonial experience a proud legacy of self-rule.
But history provided scant precedent for erecting a republic on a national scale.
No law of nature guaranteed that the thirteen rebellious colonies would stay glued together  as a single nation, nor that they would preserve, not to mention expand, their democratic way of life.
New institutions had to be created, new habits of thought cultivated.
Who could predict whether the American experiment in government by the people would succeed?
The feeble national government cobbled together under the Articles of Confederation during the Revolutionary War soon proved woefully inadequate to the task of nation building.
In less than ten years after the Revolutionary Wars conclusion, the Articles were replaced by a new Constitution, but even its adoption did not end the debate over just what form American government should take.
Would the president, the Congress, or the courts be the dominant branch?
What should be the proper division of authority between the federal government and the states?
How could the rights of individuals be protected against a potentially powerful government?
What economic policies would best serve the infant republic?
How should the nation defend itself against foreign foes?
What principles should guide foreign policy?
Was America a nation at all, or was it merely a geographic expression, destined to splinter into several bitterly quarreling sections, as had happened to  so many other would-be countries?
After a shaky start under George Washington and John Adams in the 1790s, buffeted by foreign troubles and domestic crises, the new Republic passed a major test when power was peacefully transferred from the conservative Federalists to the more liberal Jeffersonians in the election of 1800.
A confident President Jefferson proceeded boldly to expand the national territory with the landmark Louisiana Purchase in 1803.
But before long Jefferson, and then his successor, James Madison, were embroiled in what eventually proved to be a fruitless effort to spare the United States from the ravages of the war then raging in Europe.
America was dangerously divided during the War of 1812 and suffered a humiliating defeat.
But  a new sense of national unity and purpose was unleashed in the land thereafter.
President Monroe, presiding over this Era of Good Feelings, proclaimed in the Monroe Doctrine of 1823 that both of the American continents were off-limits to further European intervention.
The foundations of a continental-scale economy were laid, as a transportation revolution stitched the country together with canals and railroads and turnpikes.
Settlers flooded over those new arteries into the burgeoning West, often brusquely shouldering aside the native peoples.
Immigrants, especially from Ireland and Germany, flocked to American shores.
The combination of new lands and new labor fed the growth of a market economy, including the commercialization of agriculture and the beginnings of the factory system of production.
Old ways of life withered as the market economy drew women as well as men, children as well as adults, blacks as well as whites, into its embrace.
Ominously, the slave system grew robustly as cotton  production, mostly for sale  on European markets, exploded into the booming Southwest.
Meanwhile, the United States in the era of Andrew Jackson gave the world an impressive lesson in political science.
Between roughly 1820 and 1840, Americans virtually invented mass democracy, creating huge political parties and enormously expanding political participation by enfranchising nearly all adult white males.
Nor was the spirit of innovation confined to the political realm.
A wave of reform and cultural vitality swept through many sectors of American society.
Utopian experiments proliferated.
Religious revivals and even new religions, like Mormonism, flourished.
A national literature blossomed.
Crusades were launched for temperance, prison reform, womens rights, and the abolition of slavery.
By the second quarter of the nineteenth century, the outlines of a distinctive American national character had begun to emerge.
Americans were a diverse, restless people, tramping steadily westward, eagerly forging their own nascent Industrial Revolution, proudly exercising their democratic political rights, impatient with the old, in love with the new, testily asserting their superiority over all other peoplesand increasingly divided, in heart, in conscience, and in politics, over the single greatest blight on their record of nation making and democracy building: slavery.
The Confederation and the Constitution  17761790 T HOMAS J EFFERSON T he American Revolution was not a revolution in the sense of a radical or total change.
It did not suddenly and violently overturn the entire political and social framework, as later occurred in the French and Russian Revolutions.
What happened was accelerated evolution rather than outright revolution.
During the conflict itself, people went on working and praying, marrying and playing.
Many of them were not seriously disturbed by the actual fighting, and the most isolated communities scarcely knew that a war was on.
Yet some striking changes were ushered in, affecting social customs, political institutions, and ideas about society, government, and even gender roles.
The exodus of some eighty thousand substantial Loyalists robbed the new ship of state of conservative ballast.
This weakening of the aristocratic upper crust, with all its culture and elegance, paved the way for new, Patriot elites to emerge.
It also cleared the field for more egalitarian ideas to sweep across the land.
All men are created equal, the Declaration of Independence proclaimed, and equality was everywhere the watchword.
Most states reduced (but usually did not eliminate altogether) property-holding requirements for voting.
Ordinary men and women demanded to be addressed as Mr.
and Mrs.
titles once reserved for the wealthy and highborn.
Most Americans ridiculed the lordly pretensions of Continental Army officers who formed an exclusive hereditary order, the Society of the Cincinnati.
Social democracy was further stimulated by the growth of trade organizations for artisans and laborers.
Citizens in several states, flushed with republican fervor, also sawed off the remaining shackles of medieval inheritance laws, such as primogeniture, which awarded all of a fathers property to the eldest son.
A protracted fight for separation of church and state resulted in notable gains.
Although the wellentrenched Congregational Church continued to be legally established in some New England states, the Anglican Church, tainted by association with the British crown, was humbled.
De-anglicized, it reformed as the Protestant Episcopal Church and was everywhere disestablished.
The struggle for divorce between religion and government proved fiercest in Virginia.
It was prolonged to 1786, when freethinking Thomas Jefferson and his co-reformers, including the Baptists, won a complete victory with the passage of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom.
(See the table of established churches, p.
) The egalitarian sentiments unleashed by the war likewise challenged the institution of slavery.
Philadelphia Quakers in 1775 founded the worlds first antislavery society.
Hostilities hampered the noxious trade in black ivory, and the Continental Congress in 1774 called for the complete abolition of the slave trade, a summons to which most of the states responded positively.
Several northern states went further and either abolished slavery outright or provided for the gradual emancipation of blacks.
Even on the plantations of Virginia, a few idealistic masters freed their human chattelsthe first frail sprouts of the later abolitionist movement.
But this revolution of sentiments was sadly incomplete.
No states south of Pennsylvania abolished slavery, and in both North and South, the law discriminated harshly against freed blacks and slaves alike.
Emancipated African-Americans could be barred from purchasing property, holding certain jobs, and educating their children.
Laws against interracial marriage also sprang up at this time.
Why, in this dawning democratic age, did abolition not go further and cleanly blot the evil of slavery from the fresh face of the new nation?
The sorry truth is that the fledgling idealism of the Founding Fathers was sacrificed to political expediency.
A fight over slavery would have fractured the fragile national unity that was so desperately needed.
Great as the evil [of slavery] is, the young Virginian James Madison wrote in 1787, a dismemberment of the union would be worse.
Nearly a century later, the slavery issue did wreck the Uniontemporarily.
Likewise incomplete was the extension of the doctrine of equality to women.
Some women did serve (disguised as men) in the military, and New Jerseys new constitution in 1776 even, for a time, America is free, Could not we be?
enabled women to vote.
But though Abigail Adams teased her husband John in 1776 that the Ladies were determined to foment a rebellion of their own if they were not given political rights, most of the women in the Revolutionary era were still doing traditional womens work.
Yet women did not go untouched by Revolutionary ideals.
Central to republican ideology was the concept of civic virtuethe notion that democracy depended on the unselfish commitment of each citizen to the public good.
And who could better cultivate the habits of a virtuous citizenry than mothers, to whom society entrusted the moral education of the young?
Indeed the selfless devotion of a mother to her family was often cited as the very model of proper republican behavior.
The idea of republican motherhood thus took root, elevating women to a newly prestigious role as the special keepers of the nations conscience.
Educational opportunities for women expanded, in the expectation that educated wives and mothers could better cultivate the virtues demanded by the Republic in their husbands, daughters, and sons.
Republican women now bore crucial responsibility for the survival of the nation.
The Continental Congress in 1776 called upon the colonies to draft new constitutions.
In effect,  the Continental Congress was actually asking the colonies to summon themselves into being as new states.
The sovereignty of these new states, according to the theory of republicanism, would rest on the authority of the people.
For a time the manufacture of governments was even more pressing than the manufacture of gunpowder.
Although the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island merely retouched their colonial charters, constitution writers elsewhere worked tirelessly to capture on black-inked parchment the republican spirit of the age.
Massachusetts contributed one especially noteworthy innovation when it called a special convention to draft its constitution and then submitted the final draft directly to the people for ratification.
Once adopted in 1780, the Massachusetts constitution could be changed only by another specially called constitutional convention.
This procedure was later imitated in the drafting and ratification of the federal Constitution.
The newly penned state constitutions had many features in common.
Their similarity, as it turned out, made easier the drafting of a workable federal charter when the time was ripe.
In the British tradition, a constitution was not a written document, but rather an accumulation of laws, customs, and precedents.
Americans invented something different.
The documents they drafted were contracts that defined the powers of government, as did the old colonial charters, but they drew their authority from the people, not from the royal seal of a distant king.
As  were intended to represent a  superior to the transient whims of ordinary legislation.
Most of these documents included bills of rights, specifically guaranteeing long-prized liberties against later legislative encroachment.
Most of them required the annual election of legislators, who were thus forced to stay in touch with the mood of the people.
All of them deliberately created weak executive and judicial branches, at least by present-day standards.
A generation of quarreling with His Majestys officials had implanted a deep distrust of despotic governors and arbitrary judges.
In all the new state governments, the legislatures, as presumably the most democratic branch of government, were given sweeping powers.
But as Thomas Jefferson warned, 173 despots [in a legislature] would surely be as oppressive as one.
Many Americans soon came to agree with him.
The democratic character of the new state legislatures was vividly reflected by the presence of many members from the recently enfranchised C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 I object to the word obey in the marriageservice because it is a general word, without limitations or definition.
The obedience between man and wife, I conceive, is, or ought to be mutual.
Marriage ought never to be considered a contract between  a superior and an inferior, but a reciprocal union of interest, an implied partnership of interests, where all differences are accommodated by conference; and where  the decision admits of no retrospect.
poorer western districts.
Their influence was powerfully felt in their several successful movements to relocate state capitals from the haughty eastern seaports into the less pretentious interior.
In the Revolutionary era, the capitals of New Hampshire, New York, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia were all moved westward.
These geographical shifts portended political shifts that deeply discomfited many more conservative Americans.
Economic changes begotten by the war were likewise noteworthy, but not overwhelming.
States seized control of former crown lands, and although rich speculators had their day, many of the large Loyalist holdings were confiscated and eventually cut up into small farms.
Roger Morriss huge estate A portrait painting like this one by John Singleton Copley (1738-1815) documents physical likenesses, clothing styles, and other material possessions typical of an era.
But it can do more than that.
In the  execution of the painting itself, the preeminent portrait painter of colonial America revealed important values of his time.
Copleys composition and use of light emphasized the importance of the mother in the family.
Mrs.
Copley is the visual center of the painting; the light falls predominantly on her; and she provides the focus of activity for the family group.
Although Copley had moved to England in 1774 to avoid the disruptions of war, he had made radical friends in his home town of Boston and surely had imbibed the sentiment of the age about republican motherhooda sentiment that revered women as homemakers and mothers, the cultivators of good republican values in young citizens.
What other prevailing attitudes, about gender and age, for example, might this painting reveal?
in New York, for example, was sliced into 250 parcels thus accelerating the spread of economic democracy.
The frightful excesses of the French Revolution were avoided, partly because cheap land was easily available.
People do not chop off heads so readily when they can chop down trees.
It is highly significant that in the United States, economic democracy, broadly speaking, preceded political democracy.
A sharp stimulus was given to manufacturing by the prewar nonimportation agreements and later by the war itself.
Goods that had formerly been imported from Britain were mostly cut off, and the ingenious Yankees were forced to make their own.
Ten years after the Revolution, the busy Brandywine Creek, south of Philadelphia, was turning the water wheels of numerous mills along an eight-mile stretch.
Yet America remained overwhelmingly a nation of soil-tillers.
Economically speaking, independence had drawbacks.
Much of the coveted commerce of Britain was still reserved for the loyal parts of the empire.
American ships were now barred from British and British West Indies harbors.
Fisheries were disrupted, and bounties for ships stores had abruptly ended.
In some respects the hated British Navigation Laws were more disagreeable after independence than before.
New commercial outlets, fortunately, compensated partially for the loss of old ones.
Americans could now trade freely with foreign nations, subject to local restrictionsa boon they had not enjoyed in the days of mercantilism.
Enterprising Yankee shippers ventured boldlyand profitablyinto the Baltic and China Seas.
In 1784 the  carrying a valuable weed (ginseng) that was highly prized by Chinese herb doctors as a cure for impotence, led the way into the East Asian markets.
Yet the general economic picture was far from rosy.
War had spawned demoralizing extravagance, C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 speculation, and profiteering, with profits for some as indecently high as 300 percent.
Runaway inflation had been ruinous to many citizens, and Congress had failed in its feeble attempts to curb economic laws.
The average citizen was probably worse off financially at the end of the shooting than at the start.
The whole economic and social atmosphere was unhealthy.
A newly rich class of profiteers was noisily conspicuous, whereas many once-wealthy people were left destitute.
The controversy leading to the Revolutionary War had bred a keen distaste for taxes and encouraged disrespect for the majesty of the law generally.
John Adams had been shocked when gleefully told by a horse-jockey neighbor that the courts of justice were all closeda plight that proved to be only temporary.
What would the Americans do with the independence they had so dearly won?
The Revolution had dumped the responsibility of creating and operating a new central government squarely into their laps.
Prospects for erecting a lasting regime were far from bright.
It is always difficult to set up a new government and doubly difficult to set up a new type of government.
The picture was further clouded in America by leaders preaching natural rights and looking suspiciously at all persons clothed with authority.
America was more a name than a nation, and unity ran little deeper than the color on the map.
Disruptive forces stalked the land.
The departure of the conservative Tory element left the political system inclined toward experimentation and innovation.
Patriots had fought the war with a high degree of disunity, but they had at least concurred on allegiance to a common cause.
Now even that was gone.
It would have been almost a miracle if any government fashioned in all this confusion had long endured.
Hard times, the bane of all regimes, set in shortly after the war and hit bottom in 1786.
As if other troubles were not enough, British manufacturers, with dammed-up surpluses, began flooding the American market with cut-rate goods.
War-baby American industries, in particular, suffered industrial colic from such ruthless competition.
One Philadelphia newspaper in 1783 urged readers to don home-stitched garments of homespun cloth: Yet hopeful signs could be discerned.
The thirteen sovereign states were basically alike in governmental structure and functioned under similar constitutions.
Americans enjoyed a rich political inheritance, derived partly from Britain and partly from their own homegrown devices for self-government.
Finally, they were blessed with political leaders of a high order in men like George Washington, James Madison, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton.
The Second Continental Congress of Revolutionary days was little more than a conference of ambassadors from the thirteen states.
It was totally without constitutional authority and in general did only what it dared to do, though it asserted some control over military affairs and foreign policy.
In nearly  all respects, the thirteen states were sovereign, for they coined money, raised armies and navies, and erected tariff barriers.
The legislature of Virginia even ratified separately the treaty of alliance of 1778 with France.
Shortly before declaring independence in 1776, the Congress appointed a committee to draft a written constitution for the new nation.
The finished product was the Articles of Confederation.
Adopted by Congress in 1777, it was translated into French after the Battle of Saratoga so as to convince France that America had a genuine government in the making.
The Articles were not ratified by all thirteen states until 1781, less than eight months before the victory at Yorktown.
The chief apple of discord was western lands.
Six of the jealous states, including Pennsylvania and Maryland, had no holdings beyond the Allegheny Mountains.
Seven, notably New York and Virginia, were favored with enormous acreage, in most cases on the basis of earlier charter grants.
The six landhungry states argued that the more fortunate states would not have retained possession of this splendid prize if all the other states had not fought for it also.
A major complaint was that the land-blessed states could sell their trans-Allegheny tracts and thus pay off pensions and other debts incurred in the common cause.
States without such holdings would have to tax themselves heavily to defray these obligations.
Why not turn the whole western area over to the central government?
Unanimous approval of the Articles of Confederation by the thirteen states was required, and landstarved Maryland stubbornly held out until March 1, 1781.
Maryland at length gave in when New York surrendered its western claims and Virginia seemed about to do so.
To sweeten the pill, Congress pledged itself to dispose of these vast areas for the common benefit.
It further agreed to carve from the new public domain not colonies, but a number of republican states, which in time would be admitted to the Union on terms of complete equality with all the others.
This extraordinary commitment faithfully reflected the anticolonial spirit of the Revolution, and the pledge was later fully redeemed in the famed Northwest Ordinance of 1787.
Fertile public lands thus transferred to the central government proved to be an invaluable bond of union.
The states that had thrown their heritage into the common pot had to remain in the Union if they were to reap their share of the advantages from the land sales.
An army of westward-moving pioneers purchased their farms from the federal government, directly or indirectly, and they learned to look to the national capital, rather than to the state capitals with a consequent weakening of local influence.
Finally, a uniform national land policy was made possible.
The Articles of Confederationsome have said Articles of Confusionprovided for a loose confederation or firm league of friendship.
Thirteen independent states were thus linked together for C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 Western Land Cessions to the United States, 17821802 joint action in dealing with common problems, such as foreign affairs.
A clumsy Congress was to be the chief agency of government.
There was no executive branchGeorge III had left a bad tasteand the vital judicial arm was left almost exclusively to the states.
Congress, though dominant, was securely hobbled.
Each state had a single vote, so that some 68,000 Rhode Islanders had the same voice as more than ten times that many Virginians.
All bills dealing with subjects of importance required the support of nine states; any amendment of the Articles themselves required unanimous ratification.
Unanimity was almost impossible, and this meant that the amending process, perhaps fortunately, was unworkable.
If it had been workable, the Republic might have struggled along with a patched-up Articles of Confederation rather than replace it with an effective Constitution.
The shackled Congress was weakand was purposely designed to be weak.
Suspicious states, having just won control over taxation and commerce from Britain, had no desire to yield their newly acquired privileges to an American parliamenteven one of their own making.
Two handicaps of the Congress were crippling.
It had no power to regulate commerce, and this loophole left the states free to establish conflictingly different laws regarding tariffs and navigation.
Nor could the Congress enforce its tax-collection program.
It established a tax quota for each of the states and then asked them please to contribute their share on a voluntary basis.
The central authoritya government by supplicationwas lucky if in any year it received one-fourth of its requests.
The feeble national government in Philadelphia could advise and advocate and appeal.
But in dealing with the independent states, it could not command or coerce or control.
It could not act directly upon the individual citizens of a sovereign state; it could not even protect itself against gross indignities.
In 1783 a dangerous threat came from a group of mutinous Pennsylvania soldiers who demanded back pay.
After Congress had appealed in vain to the state for protection, the members were forced to move in disgrace to Princeton College in New Jersey.
The new Congress, with all its paper powers, was even less effective than the old Continental Congress, which wielded no constitutional powers at all.
Yet the Articles of Confederation, weak though they were, proved to be a landmark in government.
They were for those days a model of what a loose siastically hailed the new structure as the best one existing or that ever did exist.
To compare it with the European governments, he thought, was like comparing heaven and hell.
But although the Confederation was praiseworthy as confederations went, the troubled times demanded not a loosely woven   This involved the yielding by the states of their sovereignty to a completely recast federal government, which in turn would leave them free to control their local affairs.
In spite of their defects, the anemic Articles of Confederation were a significant stepping-stone toward the present Constitution.
They clearly outlined the general powers that were to be exercised by the central government, such as making treaties and establishing a postal service.
As the first written constitution of the Republic, the Articles kept alive the flickering ideal of union and held the states togetheruntil such time as they were ripe for the establishment of a strong constitution by peaceful, evolutionary methods.
Without this intermediary jump, the states probably would never have consented to the breathtaking leap from the old boycott Association of 1774 to the Constitution of the United States.
Handcuffed though the Congress of the Confederation was, it succeeded in passing supremely farsighted pieces of legislation.
These related to an immense part of the public domain recently acquired from the states and commonly known as the Old Northwest.
This area of land lay northwest of the Ohio River, east of the Mississippi River, and south of the Great Lakes.
The first of these red-letter laws was the Land Ordinance of 1785.
It provided that the acreage of the Old Northwest should be sold and that the proceeds should be used to help pay off the national debt.
The vast area was to be surveyed before sale and settlement, thus forestalling endless confusion and lawsuits.
It was to be divided into townships six miles square, each of which in turn was to be split into thirty-six sections of one square mile each.
The sixteenth section of each township was set aside to be sold for the benefit of the public schoolsa priceless gift to education in the Northwest.
The orderly settlement of the Northwest Territory, where the land was methodically surveyed and titles duly recorded, contrasted sharply with the chaos south of the Ohio River, where uncertain ownership was the norm and fraud was rampant.
Even more noteworthy was the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, which related to the governing of the Old Northwest.
This law came to grips with the problem of how a nation should deal with its coloniesthe same problem that had bedeviled the king and Parliament in London.
The solution provided by the Northwest Ordinance was a judicious compromise: temporary tutelage, then permanent equality.
First, there would be two evolutionary territorial stages, during which the area would be subordinate to the federal government.
Then, when a territory could boast sixty thousand inhabitants, it might be admitted by Congress as a state, with all the privileges of the thirteen charter members.
(This is precisely what the Continental Congress had promised the states when they surrendered their lands in 1781.
) The ordinance also forbade slavery in the Old Northwesta pathbreaking gain for freedom.
The wisdom of Congress in handling this explosive problem deserves warm praise.
If it had attempted to chain the new territories in permanent subordination, a second American Revolution almost certainly would have erupted in later years, fought this time by the West against the East.
Congress thus neatly solved the seemingly insoluble problem of empire.
The scheme worked so well that C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 36 30 24 18 12 6 16 16 35 29 23 17 11 5 34 28 22 10 Half-section 320 acres Quartersection 160 acres 80 acres 40 40 4 33 27 21 15 9 3 32 26 20 14 8 2 31 25 19 13 7 1 1 mile 1 mile 6 miles 6 miles B R I T I S H C A N A DA S PA N I S H L O U I S I A N A WISCONSIN ILLINOIS INDIANA OHIO TENNESSEE VIRGINIA M I C H I G A N Income from section 16 used to support schools Section 640 acres Survey began here Surveying the Old Northwest Sections of a township under the Land Ordinance of 1785. its basic principles were ultimately carried over from the Old Northwest to other frontier areas.
Foreign relations, especially with London, remained troubled during these anxious years of the Confederation.
Britain resented the stab in the back from its rebellious offspring and for eight years refused to send a minister to Americas backwoods capital.
London suggested, with barbed irony, that if it sent one, it would have to send thirteen.
Britain flatly declined to make a commercial treaty or to repeal its ancient Navigation Laws.
Lord Sheffield, whose ungenerous views prevailed, argued persuasively in a widely sold pamphlet that Britain would win back Americas trade anyhow.
Commerce, he insisted, would naturally follow old channels.
So why go to the Americans hat in hand?
The British also officially shut off their profitable West Indies trade from the United States, though the Yankees, with their time-tested skill in smuggling, illegally partook nonetheless.
Scheming British agents were also active along the far-flung northern frontier.
They intrigued with the disgruntled Allen brothers of Vermont and sought to annex that rebellious area to Britain.
Along the northern border, the redcoats continued to hold a chain of trading posts on U.S.
soil, and there they maintained their fur trade with the Indians.
One plausible excuse for remaining was the failure of the American states to honor the treaty of peace in regard to debts and Loyalists.
But the main purpose of Britain in hanging on was probably to curry favor with the Indians and keep their tomahawks lined up on the side of the king as a barrier against future American attacks on Canada.
All these grievances against Britain were maddening to patriotic Americans.
Some citizens demanded, with more heat than wisdom, that the United States force the British into line by imposing restrictions on their imports to America.
But Congress could not control commerce, and the states refused to adopt a uniform tariff policy.
Some easy states deliberately lowered their tariffs in order to attract an unfair share of trade.
Spain, though recently an enemy of Britain, was openly unfriendly to the new Republic.
It controlled the mouth of the all-important Mississippi, down which the pioneers of Tennessee and Kentucky were forced to float their produce.
In 1784 Spain closed the river to American commerce, threatening the West with strangulation.
Spain likewise claimed a large area north of the Gulf of Mexico, including Florida, granted to the United States by the British in 1783.
At Natchez, on disputed soil, it held an important fort.
It also schemed with the neighboring Indians, grievously antagonized by the rapacious land policies of Georgia and North Carolina, to hem in the Americans east of the Alleghenies.
Spain and Britain together, radiating their influence out among resentful Indian tribes, prevented America from exercising effective control over about half of its total territory.
Even France, Americas comrade-in-arms, cooled off now that it had humbled Britain.
The Main Centers of Spanish and British Influence After 1783 This map shows graphically that the United States in 1783 achieved complete independence in name only, particularly in the area west of the Appalachian Mountains.
Not until twenty years had passed did the new Republic, with the purchase of Louisiana from France in 1803, eliminate foreign influence from the area east of the Mississippi River.
Fort Niagara (U.S.
soil) Fort Michilimackinac (U.S soil) Detroit (U.S.
soil) St.
Louis Natchez New Orleans SPANISH LOUISIANA BRITISH  CANADA GEORGIA SPANISH FLORIDA SOUTH CAROLINA NORTH CAROLINA VIRGINIA PA.
N.H.
N.Y.
DEL.
N.J.
CONN.
MASS.
MASS.
R.I.
Area disputed by Spain and U.S.
British influence Spanish influence French demanded the repayment of money loaned during the war and restricted trade with their bustling West Indies and other ports.
Pirates of the North African states, including the arrogant Dey of Algiers, were ravaging Americas Mediterranean commerce and enslaving Yankee sailors.
The British purchased protection for their own subjects, and as colonists the Americans had enjoyed this shield.
But as an independent nation, the United States was too weak to fight and too poor to bribe.
A few Yankee shippers engaged in the Mediterranean trade with forged British protection papers, but not all were so bold or so lucky.
John Jay, secretary for foreign affairs, derived some hollow satisfaction from these insults.
He hoped they would at least humiliate the American people into framing a new government at home that would be strong enough to command respect abroad.
Economic storm clouds continued to loom in the mid-1780s.
The requisition system of raising money was breaking down; some of the states refused to pay anything, while complaining bitterly about the tyranny of King Congress.
Interest on the public debt was piling up at home, and the nations credit was evaporating abroad.
Individual states were getting out of hand.
Quarrels over boundaries generated numerous minor pitched battles.
Some of the states were levying duties on goods from their neighbors; New York, for example, taxed firewood from Connecticut and cabbages from New Jersey.
A number of the states were again starting to grind out depreciated paper currency, and a few of them had passed laws sanctioning the semiworthless rag money.
As a contemporary rhymester put it, An alarming uprising, known as Shayss Rebellion, flared up in western Massachusetts in 1786.
Impoverished backcountry farmers, many of them Revolutionary War veterans, were losing their farms through mortgage foreclosures and tax delinquencies.
Led by Captain Daniel Shays, a veteran of the Revolution, these desperate debtors demanded cheap paper money, lighter taxes, and a suspension of property takeovers.
Hundreds of angry agitators, again seizing their muskets, attempted to enforce their demands.
Massachusetts authorities responded with drastic action.
Supported partly by contributions from wealthy citizens, they raised a small army.
Several skirmishes occurredat Springfield three Shaysites were killed, and one was woundedand the movement collapsed.
Daniel Shays, who believed that he was fighting anew against tyranny, was condemned to death but was later pardoned.
Shayss followers were crushedbut the nightmarish memory lingered on.
The outbursts of these and other distressed debtors struck fear in the hearts of the propertied class, who began to suspect that the Revolution had created a monster of mobocracy.
Good God!
burst out George Washington, who felt that only a Tory or a Briton could have predicted such disorders.
Unbridled republicanism, it seemed to many of the elite, had fed an insatiable appetite for liberty that was fast becoming license.
Civic virtue was no longer sufficient to rein in self-interest and greed.
It had become undeniably evident, one skeptic sorrowfully lamented, that some malignant disorder has seized upon our body politic.
If republicanism was too shaky a ground upon which to construct a new nation, a stronger central government would provide the needed foundation.
A few panicky citizens even talked of importing a European monarch to carry on where George III had failed.
How critical were conditions under the Confederation?
Conservatives, anxious to safeguard their C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 march directly to Boston, plunder it, and then .
destroy the nest of devils, who by their influence, make the Court enact what they please, burn it and lay the town of Boston in ashes.
wealth and position, naturally exaggerated the seriousness of the nations plight.
They were eager to persuade their fellow citizens to amend the Articles of Confederation in favor of a muscular central government.
But the poorer states rights people poohpoohed the talk of anarchy.
Many of them were debtors who feared that a powerful federal government would force them to pay their creditors.
Yet friends and critics of the Confederation agreed that it needed some strengthening.
Popular toasts were Cement to the Union and A hoop to the barrel.
The chief differences arose over how this goal should be attained and how a maximum degree of states rights could be reconciled with a strong central government.
America probably could have muddled through somehow with amended Articles of Confederation.
But the adoption of a completely new constitution certainly spared the Republic much costly indecision, uncertainty, and turmoil.
The nationwide picture was actually brightening before the Constitution was drafted.
Nearly half the states had not issued semiworthless paper currency, and some of the monetary black sheep showed signs of returning to the sound-money fold.
Prosperity was beginning to emerge from the fog of depression.
By 1789 overseas shipping had largely regained its place in the commercial world.
If conditions had been as grim in 1787 as painted by foes of the Articles of Confederation, the move for a new constitution would hardly have encountered such heated opposition.
Control of commerce, more than any other problem, touched off the chain reaction that led to a constitutional convention.
Interstate squabbling over this issue had become so alarming by 1786 that Virginia, taking the lead, issued a call for a convention at Annapolis, Maryland.
Nine states appointed delegates, but only five were finally represented.
With so laughable a showing, nothing could be done about the ticklish question of commerce.
A charismatic New Yorker, thirty-one-year-old Alexander Hamilton, brilliantly saved the convention from complete failure by engineering the adoption of his report.
It called upon Congress to summon a convention to meet in Philadelphia the next year, not to deal with commerce alone, but to bolster the entire fabric of the Articles of Confederation.
Congress, though slowly and certainly dying in New York City, was reluctant to take a step that might hasten its day of reckoning.
But after six  of the states had seized the bit in their teeth  and appointed delegates anyhow, Congress belatedly issued the call for a convention  Confederation.
Every state chose representatives, except for independent-minded Rhode Island (still Rogues Island), a stronghold of paper-moneyites.
These leaders were all appointed by the state legislatures, whose members had been elected by voters who could qualify as property holders.
This double distillation inevitably brought together a select group of propertied menthough it is a grotesque distortion to claim that they shaped the Constitution primarily to protect their personal financial interests.
When one of them did suggest restricting federal office to major property owners, he was promptly denounced for the unwisdom of interweaving into a republican constitution a veneration for wealth.
A quorum of the fifty-five emissaries from twelve states finally convened at Philadelphia on May 25, 1787, in the imposing red-brick statehouse.
The smallness of the assemblage facilitated intimate acquaintance and hence compromise.
Sessions were held in complete secrecy, with armed sentinels All communities divide themselves into the few and the many.
The first are the rich and wellborn, the other the mass of the people.
The people are turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or determine right.
Give therefore to the first class a distinct, permanent share in the government.
They will check the unsteadiness of the second, and as they cannot receive any advantage by change, they therefore will ever maintain good government.
posted at the doors.
Delegates knew that they would generate heated differences, and they did not want to advertise their own dissensions or put the ammunition of harmful arguments into the mouths of the opposition.
The caliber of the participants was extraordinarily highdemigods, Jefferson called them.
The crisis was such as to induce the ablest men to drop their personal pursuits and come to the aid of their country.
Most of the members were lawyers, and most of them fortunately were old hands at constitution making in their own states.
George Washington, towering austere and aloof among the demigods, was unanimously elected chairman.
His enormous prestige, as the Sword of the Revolution, served to quiet overheated tempers.
Benjamin Franklin, then eighty-one, added the urbanity of an elder statesman, though he was inclined to be indiscreetly talkative in his declining years.
Concerned for the secrecy of their deliberations, the convention assigned chaperones to accompany Franklin to dinner parties and make sure he held his tongue.
James Madison, then thirty-six and a profound student of government, made contributions so notable that he has been dubbed the Father of the Constitution.
Alexander Hamilton, then only thirty-two, was present as an advocate of a super-powerful central government.
His five-hour speech in behalf of his plan, though the most eloquent of the convention, left only one delegate convincedhimself.
Most of the fiery Revolutionary leaders of 1776 were absent.
Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Thomas Paine were in Europe; Samuel Adams and John Hancock were not elected by Massachusetts.
Patrick Henry, ardent champion of states rights, was chosen as a delegate from Virginia but declined to serve, declaring that he smelled a rat.
It was perhaps well that these architects of revolution were absent.
The time had come to yield the stage to leaders interested in fashioning solid political systems.
The fifty-five delegates were a conservative, wellto-do body: lawyers, merchants, shippers, land speculators, and moneylenders.
Not a single spokesperson was present from the poorer debtor groups.
Nineteen of the fifty-five owned slaves.
They were young (the average age was about forty-two) but experienced statesmen.
Above all, they were nationalists, more interested in preserving and strengthening the young Republic than in further stirring the roiling cauldron of popular democracy.
The delegates hoped to crystallize the last evaporating pools of revolutionary idealism into a stable political structure that would endure.
They strongly desired a firm, dignified, and respected government.
They believed in republicanism but sought to protect the American experiment from its weaknesses abroad and excesses at home.
In a broad sense, the piratical Dey of Algiers, who drove the delegates to their work, was a Founding Father.
They aimed to clothe the central authority with genuine C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 What country before ever existed a century and a half without a rebellion?
The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants.
It is its natural manure.
power, especially in controlling tariffs, so that the United States could wrest satisfactory commercial treaties from foreign nations.
The shortsighted hostility of the British mercantilists spurred the constitution framers to their task, and in this sense the illiberal Lord Sheffield was also a Founding Father.
Other motives hovered in the Philadelphia hall.
Delegates were determined to preserve the union, forestall anarchy, and ensure security of life and property against dangerous uprisings by the mobocracy.
Above all, they sought to curb the unrestrained democracy rampant in the various states.
We have, probably, had too good an opinion of human nature in forming our confederation, Washington concluded.
The specter of the recent outburst in Massachusetts was especially alarming, and in this sense Daniel Shays was yet another Founding Father.
Grinding necessity extorted the Constitution from a reluctant nation.
Fear occupied the fifty-sixth chair.
Some of the travel-stained delegates, when they first reached Philadelphia, decided upon a daring step.
They would completely  Confederation, despite explicit instructions from Congress to  were determined to overthrow the existing government of the United States by peaceful means.
A scheme proposed by populous Virginia, and known as the large-state plan, was first pushed forward as the framework of the Constitution.
Its essence was that representation in both houses of a bicameral Congress should be based on populationan arrangement that would naturally give the larger states an advantage.
Tiny New Jersey, suspicious of brawny Virginia, countered with the small-state plan.
This provided for equal representation in a unicameral Congress by states, regardless of size and population, as under the existing Articles of Confederation.
The weaker states feared that under the Virginia scheme, the stronger states would band together and lord it over the rest.
Angry debate, heightened by a stifling heat wave, led to deadlock.
The danger loomed that the convention would unravel in complete failure.
Even skeptical old Benjamin Franklin seriously proposed that the daily sessions be opened with prayer by a local clergyman.
Indeed, I think all the good of this new Constitution might have been couched in three or four new articles, to be added to the good, old, and venerable fabric.
After bitter and prolonged debate, the Great Compromise of the convention was hammered out and agreed upon.
A cooling of tempers came coincidentally with a cooling of the temperature.
The larger states were conceded representation by population in the House of Representatives (Art.
I, Sec.
II, para.
3; see Appendix at the end of this book), and the smaller states were appeased by equal representation in the Senate (see Art.
I, Sec.
III, para.
Each state, no matter how poor or small, would have two senators.
The big states obviously yielded more.
As a sop to them, the delegates agreed that every tax bill or revenue measure must originate in the House, where population counted more heavily (see Art.
I, Sec.
VII, para.
This critical compromise broke the logjam, and from then on success seemed within reach.
In a significant reversal of the arrangement most state constitutions had embodied, the new Constitution provided for a strong, independent executive in the presidency.
The framers were here partly inspired by the example of Massachusetts, where a vigorous, popularly elected governor had suppressed Shayss Rebellion.
The president was to be military commander in chief and to have wide powers of appointment to domestic offices including judgeships.
The president was also to have veto power over legislation.
The Constitution as drafted was a bundle of compromises; they stand out in every section.
A vital compromise was the method of electing the president indirectly by the Electoral College, rather than by direct means.
While the large states would have the advantage in the first round of popular voting, as a states share of electors was based on the total of its senators and representatives in Congress, the small states would gain a larger voice if no candidate got a majority of electoral votes and the election was thrown to the House of Representatives, where each state had only one vote (see Art.
II, Sec.
I, para.
Although the framers of the Constitution expected election by the House to occur frequently, it has happened just twice, in 1800 and in 1824.
Sectional jealousy also intruded.
Should the voteless slave of the southern states count as a person in apportioning direct taxes and in according representation in the House of Representatives?
The South, not wishing to be deprived of influence, answered yes.
The North replied no, arguing that, as slaves were not citizens, the North might as logically demand additional representation based on its horses.
As a compromise between total representation and none at all, it was decided that a slave might count as three-fifths of a person.
Hence the memorable, if arbitrary, three-fifths compromise (see Art.
I, Sec.
II, para.
C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 Well, Doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?
A republic, if you can keep it.
16431684 New England Confederation 4  colonies 16861689 Dominion of New England 7  colonies 1754 Albany Congress 7  colonies 1765 Stamp Act Congress 9  colonies 17721776 Committees of Correspondence  13  colonies 1774 First Continental Congress (adopts The Association) 12  colonies 17751781 Second Continental Congress 13  colonies 17811789 Articles of Confederation 13  states 17891790 Federal Constitution 13  states Most of the states wanted to shut off the African slave trade.
But South Carolina and Georgia, requiring slave labor in their rice paddies and malarial swamps, raised vehement protests.
By way of compromise the convention stipulated that the slave trade might continue until the end of 1807, at which time Congress could turn off the spigot (see Art.
I, Sec.
IX, para.
It did so as soon as the prescribed interval had elapsed.
Meanwhile, all the new state constitutions except Georgias forbade overseas slave trade.
Heated clashes among the delegates have been overplayed.
The area of agreement was actually large; otherwise the convention would have speedily disbanded.
Economically, the members of the Constitutional Convention generally saw eye to eye; they demanded sound money and the protection of private property.
Politically, they were in basic agreement; they favored a stronger government, with three branches and with checks and balances among themwhat critics branded a tripleheaded monster.
Finally, the convention was virtually unanimous in believing that manhood-suffrage democracygovernment by democratick babblerswas something to be feared and fought.
Daniel Shays, the prime bogeyman, still frightened the conservative-minded delegates.
They deliberately erected safeguards against the excesses of the mob, and they made these barriers as strong as they dared.
The awesome federal judges were to be appointed for life.
The powerful president was to be elected  lordly senators were to be chosen  legislatures (see Art.
I, Sec.
III, para.
Only in the case of one-half of one of the three great branches the House of Representativeswere qualified (propertied) citizens permitted to choose their officials by  Yet the new charter also contained democratic elements.
Above all, it stood foursquare on the two great principles of republicanism: that the only legitimate government was one based on the consent of the governed, and that the powers of government should be limitedin this case specifically limited by a written constitution.
The virtue of the people, not the authority of the state, was to be the ultimate guarantor of liberty, justice, and order.
We the people, the preamble began, in a ringing affirmation of these republican doctrines.
At the end of seventeen muggy weeksMay 25 to September 17, 1787only forty-two of the original fifty-five members remained to sign the Constitution.
Three of the forty-two, refusing to do so, returned to their states to resist ratification.
The remainder, adjourning to the City Tavern, celebrated the toastworthy occasion.
But no members of the convention were completely happy about the result.
They were too near their workand too A loose confederation of states A firm union of people 1 vote in Congress for each state 2 votes in Senate for each state; representation by  population in House (see Art.
I, Secs.
II, III) Vote of 9 states in Congress for all important Simple majority vote in Congress, subject to presidential measures veto (see Art.
I, Sec.
VII, para.
2) Laws administered loosely by committees of Congress Laws executed by powerful president (see Art.
II, Secs.
II, III) No congressional power over commerce Congress to regulate both foreign and interstate commerce (see Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
3) No congressional power to levy taxes Extensive power in Congress to levy taxes (see Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
1) Limited federal courts Federal courts, capped by Supreme Court (see Art.
III) Unanimity of states for amendment Amendment less difficult (see Art.
V) No authority to act directly upon individuals Ample power to enforce laws by coercion of individuals and no power to coerce states and to some extent of states weary.
Whatever their personal desires, they finally had to compromise and adopt what was acceptable to the entire body, and what presumably would be acceptable to the entire country.
The Framing Fathers early foresaw that nationwide acceptance of the Constitution would not be easy to obtain.
A formidable barrier was unanimous ratification by all thirteen states, as required for amendment by the still-standing Articles of Confederation.
But since absent Rhode Island was certain to veto the Constitution, the delegates boldly adopted a different scheme.
They stipulated that when nine states had registered their approval through specially elected conventions, the Constitution would become the supreme law of the land in those states ratifying (see Art.
VII).
This was extraordinary, even revolutionary.
It was in effect an appeal over the heads of the Congress that had called the convention, and over the heads of the legislatures that had chosen its members, to the peopleor those of the people who could vote.
In this way the framers could claim greater popular sanction for their handiwork.
A divided Congress submitted the document to the states on this basis, without recommendation of any kind.
The American people were somewhat astonished, so well had the secrets of the convention been concealed.
The public had expected the old Articles of Confederation to be patched up; now it was handed a startling new document in which, many thought, the precious jewel of state sovereignty was swallowed up.
One of the hottest debates of American history forthwith erupted.
The antifederalists, who opposed the stronger federal government, were arrayed against the federalists, who obviously favored it.
A motley crew gathered in the antifederalist camp.
Its leaders included prominent revolutionaries like Samuel Adams, Patrick Henry, and Richard Henry Lee.
Their followers consisted primarily, though not exclusively, of states rights devotees, backcountry dwellers, and one-horse farmersin general, the poorest classes.
They were joined by paper-moneyites and debtors, many of whom feared that a potent central government would force them to pay off their debtsand at full value.
Large numbers of antifederalists saw in the Constitution a plot by the upper crust to steal power back from the common folk.
Silver-buckled federalists had power and influence on their side.
They enjoyed the support of such commanding figures as George Washington and Benjamin Franklin.
Most of them lived in the settled areas along the seaboard, not in the raw backcountry.
Overall, they were wealthier than the antifederalists, more educated, and better organized.
They also controlled the press.
More than a hundred C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 1.
Delaware Dec.
7, 1787 Unanimous 13  59,096 2.
Pennsylvania Dec.
12, 1787 46 to 23 3 433,611 3.
New Jersey Dec.
18, 1787 Unanimous 9 184,139 4.
Georgia Jan.
2, 1788 Unanimous 11 82,548 5.
Connecticut Jan.
9, 1788 128 to 40 8 237,655 6.
Massachusetts Feb.
7, 1788 187 to 168 2 475,199 (incl.
Maine) 7.
Maryland Apr.
28, 1788 63 to 11 6 319,728 8.
South Carolina  May 23, 1788  149 to 73 7 249,073 9.
New Hampshire June 21, 1788  57 to 46 10 141,899 10.
Virginia  June 26, 1788 89 to 79 1 747,610 11.
New York July 26, 1788  30 to 27 5 340,241 12.
North Carolina  Nov.
21, 1789  195 to 77 4  395,005 13.
Rhode Island  May 29, 1790  34 to 32  12  69,112  newspapers were published in America in the 1780s; only a dozen supported the antifederalist cause.
Antifederalists voiced vehement objections to the gilded trap known as the Constitution.
They cried with much truth that it had been drawn up by the aristocratic elements and hence was antidemocratic.
They likewise charged that the sovereignty of the states was being submerged and that the freedoms of the individual were jeopardized by the absence of a bill of rights.
They decried the dropping of annual elections for congressional representatives, the erecting of a federal stronghold ten miles square (later the District of Columbia), the creation of a standing army, the omission of any reference to God, and the highly questionable procedure of ratifying with only two-thirds of the states.
A Philadelphia newspaper added that Benjamin Franklin was a fool from age and George Washington a fool from nature.
The Struggle over Ratification This mottled map shows that federalist support tended to cluster around the coastal areas, which had enjoyed profitable commerce with the outside world, including the export of grain and tobacco.
Impoverished frontiersmen, suspicious of a powerful new central government under the Constitution, were generally antifederalists.
Special elections, some apathetic but others hotly contested, were held in the various states for members of the ratifying conventions.
The candidates federalist or antifederalistwere elected on the basis of their pledges for or against the Constitution.
With the ink barely dry on the parchment, four small states quickly accepted the Constitution, for they had come off much better than they expected.
Pennsylvania, number two on the list of ratifiers, was the first large state to act, but not until highhanded irregularities had been employed by the federalist legislature in calling a convention.
These included the forcible seating of two antifederalist members, their clothes torn and their faces red with rage, in order to complete a quorum.
Massachusetts, the second most populous state, provided an acid test.
If the Constitution had failed in Massachusetts, the entire movement might easily have bogged down.
The Boston ratifying convention at first contained an antifederalist majority.
It included grudging Shaysites and the aging Samuel Adams, as suspicious of government power in 1787 as he had been in 1776.
The assembly buzzed with dismaying talk of summoning another constitutional convention, as though the nation had not already shot its bolt.
Clearly the choice was not between this Constitution and a better one, but between this Constitution and the creaking Articles of Confederation.
The absence of a bill of rights alarmed the antifederalists.
But the federalists gave them solemn assurances that the first Congress would add such a safeguard by amendment, and ratification was then secured in Massachusetts by the rather narrow margin of 187 to 168.
Three more states fell into line.
The last of these was New Hampshire, whose convention at first had contained a strong antifederalist majority.
The federalists cleverly arranged a prompt adjournment and then won over enough waverers to secure ratification.
Nine statesall but Virginia, New York, North Carolina, and Rhode Islandhad now taken shelter under the new federal roof, and the document was officially adopted on June 21, 1788.
Francis Hopkinson exulted in his song The New Roof: But such rejoicing was premature so long as the four dissenters, conspicuously New York and Virginia, dug in their heels.
Proud Virginia, the biggest and most populous state, provided fierce antifederalist opposition.
There the college-bred federalist orators, for once, encountered worthy antagonists, including the fiery Patrick C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 Henry.
He professed to see in the fearsome document the death warrant of liberty.
George Washington, James Madison, and John Marshall, on the federalist side, lent influential support.
With New Hampshire about to ratify, the new Union was going to be formed anyhow, and Virginia could not very well continue comfortably as an independent state.
After exciting debate in the state convention, ratification carried, 89 to 79.
New York also experienced an uphill struggle, burdened as it was with its own heavily antifederalist state convention.
Alexander Hamilton at heart favored a much stronger central government than that under debate, but he contributed his sparkling personality and persuasive eloquence to whipping up support for federalism as framed.
He also joined John Jay and James Madison in penning a masterly series of articles for the New York newspapers.
Though designed as propaganda, these essays remain the most penetrating commentary ever written on the Constitution and are still widely sold in book form as  famous of these is Madisons  which brilliantly refuted the conventional wisdom of the day that it was impossible to extend a republican form of government over a large territory.
New York finally yielded.
Realizing that the state could not prosper apart from the Union, the convention ratified the document by the close count of 30 to 27.
At the same time, it approved thirty-two proposed amendments andvain hopeissued a call for yet another convention to modify the Constitution.
Last-ditch dissent developed in only two states.
A hostile convention met in North Carolina, then adjourned without taking a vote.
Rhode Island did not even summon a ratifying convention, rejecting the Constitution by popular referendum.
The two most ruggedly individualist centers of the colonial erahomes of the otherwise mindedthus ran true to form.
They were to change their course, albeit unwillingly, only after the new government had been in operation for some months.
The race for ratification, despite much apathy, was close and quite bitter in some localities.
No lives were lost, but riotous disturbances broke out in New York and Pennsylvania, involving bruises and bloodshed.
There was much behind-the-scenes pressure on delegates who had promised their constituents to vote against the Constitution.
The last Tis really astonishing that the same people, who have just emerged from a long and cruel war in defense of liberty, should now agree to fix an elective despotism upon themselves and their posterity.
This constitution is said to have beautiful features; but when I come to examine these features, Sir, they appear to me horridly frightful: Among other deformities, it has an awful squinting; it squints towards monarchy: And does not this raise indignation in the breast of every American?
Your President may easily become King: Your Senate is so imperfectly constructed that your dearest rights may be sacrificed by what may be a small minority; .
Where are your checks in this Government?
four states ratified, not because they wanted to but because they had to.
They could not safely exist outside the fold.
The minority had triumphedtwice.
A militant minority of American radicals had engineered the military Revolution that cast off the unwritten British constitution.
A militant minority of conservativesnow embracing many of the earlier radicalshad engineered the peaceful revolution that overthrew the inadequate constitution known as the Articles of Confederation.
Eleven states, in effect, had seceded from the Confederation, leaving the two still in, actually out in the cold.
A majority had not spoken.
Only about onefourth of the adult white males in the country, chiefly the propertied people, had voted for delegates to the ratifying conventions.
Careful estimates indicate that if the new Constitution had been submitted to a manhood-suffrage vote, as in New York, it would have encountered much more opposition, probably defeat.
Conservatism was victorious.
Safeguards had been erected against mob-rule excesses, while the republican gains of the Revolution were conserved.
Radicals such as Patrick Henry, who had ousted British rule, saw themselves in turn upended by American conservatives.
The federalists were convinced that by setting the drifting ship of state on a steady course, they could restore economic and political stability.
Yet if the architects of the Constitution were conservative, it is worth emphasizing that they conC HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 served the principle of republican government through a redefinition of popular sovereignty.
Unlike the antifederalists, who believed that the sovereignty of the people resided in a single branch of governmentthe legislaturethe federalists contended that every branchexecutive, judiciary, and legislatureeffectively represented the people.
By ingeniously embedding the doctrine of self-rule in a self-limiting system of checks and balances among these branches, the Constitution reconciled the potentially conflicting principles of liberty and order.
It represented a marvelous achievement, one that elevated the ideals of the Revolution even while setting boundaries to them.
One of the distinctive and enduringparadoxes of American history was thus revealed: in the United States, conservatives and radicals alike have championed the heritage of republican revolution.
I am a plain man, and I get my living by the plow.
I have lived in a part of the country where I have known the worth of good government by the want of it.
The black cloud of Shays rebellion rose last winter in my area.
It brought on a state of anarchy that led to tyranny.
When I saw this Constitution I found that it was a cure for these disorders.
I got a copy of it and read it over and over.
I dont think the worse of the Constitution because lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men are fond of it.
[They] are all embarked in the same cause with us, and we must all swim or sink together.
We fought Great Britainsome said for a three-penny tax on tea; but it was not that.
It was because they claimed a right to tax us and bind us in all cases whatever.
And does not this Constitution do the same?
These lawyers and men of learning and money men, that talk so finely and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us poor illiterate people swallow down the pill.
They expect to be the managers of the Constitution, and get all the power and money into their own hands.
And then they will swallow up all us little folks, just as the whale swallowed up Jonah!
First Continental Congress calls for abolition of slave trade Philadelphia Quakers found worlds first antislavery society New Jersey constitution temporarily gives women the vote Articles of Confederation adopted by Second Continental Congress Massachusetts adopts first constitution drafted in convention and ratified by popular vote Articles of Confederation put into effect Military officers form Society of the Cincinnati Land Ordinance of 1785 Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom Shayss Rebellion Meeting of five states to discuss revision of the Articles of Confederation Northwest Ordinance Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia Ratification by nine states guarantees a new government under the Constitution C HAPTER 9 The Confederation and the Constitution, 17761790 lthough the Constitution has endured over two centuries as the basis of American government, historians have differed sharply over how to interpret its origins and meaning.
The so-called Nationalist School of historians, writing in the late nineteenth century, viewed the Constitution as the logical culmination of the Revolution and, more generally, as a crucial step in the God-given progress of Anglo-Saxon peoples.
As described in John Fiskes young nation, buffeted by foreign threats and growing internal chaos, with only a weak central government to lean on, was saved by the adoption of a more rigorous Constitution, the ultimate fulfillment of republican ideals.
By the early twentieth century, however, the progressive historians had turned a more critical eye to the Constitution.
Having observed the Supreme Court of their own day repeatedly overrule legislation designed to better social conditions for the masses, they began to view the original document as an instrument created by elite conservatives to wrest political power away from the common people.
For historians like Carl Becker and Charles Beard, the Constitution was part of the Revolutionary struggle between the lower classes (small farmers, debtors, and laborers) and the upper classes (merchants, financiers, and manufacturers).
Beards   Articles of Confederation had protected debtors and small property owners and displeased wealthy elites heavily invested in trade, the public debt, and the promotion of manufacturing.
Only a stronger, more centralized government could protect their extensive property interests.
Reviewing the economic holdings of the Founding Fathers, Beard determined that most of those men were indeed deeply involved in investments that would increase in value under the Constitution.
In effect, Beard argued, the Constitution represented a successful attempt by conservative elites to buttress their own economic supremacy at the expense of less fortunate Americans.
He further contended that the Constitution was ratified by default, because the people most disadvantaged by the new government did  not possess the property qualifications needed  to votemore evidence of the class conflict underlying the struggle between the federalists and the  antifederalists.
Beards economic interpretation of the Constitution held sway through the 1940s.
Historians like Merrill Jensen elaborated Beards analysis by arguing that the 1780s were not in fact mired in chaos, but rather were hopeful times for many Americans.
In the 1950s, however, this analysis fell victim to the attacks of the consensus historians, who sought explanations for the Constitution in factors other than class interest.
Scholars such as Robert Brown and Forrest McDonald convincingly disputed Beards evidence about delegates property ownership and refuted his portrayal of the masses as propertyless and disfranchised.
They argued that the Constitution derived from an emerging consensus that the country needed a stronger central  government.
Scholars since the 1950s have searched for new ways to understand the origins of the Constitution.
The most influential work has been Gordon Woods reinterpreted the ratification controversy as a struggle to define the true essence of republicanism.
Antifederalists so feared human inclination toward corruption that they shuddered at the prospect of putting powerful political weapons in the hands of a central government.
They saw small governments susceptible to local control as the only safeguard against tyranny.
The federalists, on the other hand, believed that a strong, balanced national government would rein in selfish human instincts and channel them toward the pursuit of the common good.
Alarmed by the indulgences of the state governments, the federalists, James Madison in particular (especially in  novel ideal of an extensive republic, a polity that would achieve stability by virtue of its great size and diversity.
This conception challenged the conventional wisdom that a republic could survive only if it extended over a small area with a homogeneous population.
In this sense, Wood argued, the Constitution represented a bold experimentthe fulfillment, rather than the repudiation, of the most advanced ideas of the Revolutionary eraeven though it emanated from traditional elites determined to curtail dangerous disruptions to the social order.
For further reading, see page A6 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Launching the New Ship of State  17891800 A LEXANDER H AMILTON , 1799 A mericas new ship of state did not spread its sails to the most favorable breezes.
Within twelve troubled years, the American people had risen up and thrown overboard both the British yoke and the Articles of Confederation.
A decade of lawbreaking and constitution smashing was not the best training for government making.
Americans had come to regard a central authority, replacing that of George III, as a necessary evilsomething to be distrusted, watched, and curbed.
Finances of the infant government were likewise precarious.
The revenue had declined to a trickle, whereas the public debt, with interest heavily in arrears, was mountainous.
Worthless paper money, both state and national, was as plentiful as metallic money was scarce.
Nonetheless, the Americans were brashly trying to erect a republic on an immense scale, something that no other people had attempted and that traditional political theory deemed impossible.
The eyes of a skeptical world were on the upstart United States.
When the Constitution was launched in 1789, the Republic was continuing to grow at an amazing rate.
Population was doubling about every twenty-five years, and the first official census of 1790 recorded almost 4 million people.
Cities had blossomed proportionately: Philadelphia numbered 42,000, New York 33,000, Boston 18,000, Charleston 16,000, and Baltimore 13,000.
Americas population was still about 90 percent rural, despite the flourishing cities.
All but 5 percent of the people lived east of the Appalachian Mountains.
The trans-Appalachian overflow was concentrated chiefly in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio, all of which were welcomed as states within fourteen years.
(Vermont had preceded them, becoming the fourteenth state in 1791.
) Foreign visitors to America looked down their noses at the roughness and crudity resulting from ax-and-rifle pioneering life.
People of the western watersin the stumpstudded clearings of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohiowere particularly restive and dubiously loyal.
The mouth of the Mississippi, their life-giving outlet, lay in the hands of unfriendly Spaniards.
Slippery Spanish and British agents, jingling gold, moved freely among the settlers and held out seductive promises of independence.
Many observers wondered whether the emerging United States would ever grow to maturity.
General Washington, the esteemed war hero, was unanimously drafted as president by the Electoral College in 1789the only presidential nominee ever to be honored by unanimity.
His presence was imposing: 6 feet 2 inches, 175 pounds, broad and sloping shoulders, strongly pointed chin, and pockmarks (from smallpox) on nose and cheeks.
Much preferring the quiet of Mount Vernon to the turmoil of politics, he was perhaps the only president who did not in some way angle for this exalted office.
Balanced rather than brilliant, he commanded his followers by strength of character rather than by the arts of the politician.
Washingtons long journey from Mount Vernon to New York City, the temporary capital, was a triumphal procession.
He was greeted by roaring  cannon, pealing bells, flower-carpeted roads, and singing and shouting citizens.
With appropriate ceremony, he solemnly and somewhat nervously took the oath of office on April 30, 1789, on a crowded balcony overlooking Wall Street, which some have regarded as a bad omen.
Washington soon put his stamp on the new government, especially by establishing the cabinet.
The Constitution does not mention a cabinet; it merely provides that the president may require written opinions of the heads of the executive-branch departments (see Art.
II, Sec.
II, para.
But this system proved so cumbersome, and involved so This people is the hope of the human race.
The Americans should be an example of political, religious, commercial and industrial liberty.
But to obtain these ends for us, America .
must not become .
a mass of divided powers, contending for territory and trade.
much homework, that cabinet meetings gradually evolved in the Washington administration.
At first only three full-fledged department heads served under the president: Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, and Secretary of War Henry Knox.
The new nation faced some unfinished business.
Many antifederalists had sharply criticized the Constitution drafted at Philadelphia for its failure to provide guarantees of individual rights such as freedom of religion and trial by jury.
Many states had ratified the federal Constitution on the understanding that it would soon be amended to include such guarantees.
Drawing up a bill of rights headed the list of imperatives facing the new government.
Amendments to the Constitution could be proposed in either of two waysby a new constitutional convention requested by two-thirds of the states or by a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress.
Fearing that a new convention might unravel the narrow federalist victory in the ratification struggle, James Madison determined to draft the amendments himself.
He then guided them through Congress, where his intellectual and political skills were quickly making him the leading figure.
Adopted by the necessary number of states in 1791, the first ten amendments to the Constitution, popularly known as the Bill of Rights, safeguard some of the most precious American principles.
Among these are protections for freedom of religion, speech, and the press; the right to bear arms and to be tried by a jury; and the right to assemble and petition the government for redress of grievances.
The Bill of Rights also prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and arbitrary government seizure of private property.
To guard against the danger that enumerating such rights might lead to the conclusion that they were the only ones protected, Madison inserted the C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 Secretary of state 1789 Secretary of treasury 1789 Secretary of war 1789 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Attorney general 1789 Not head of Justice Dept.
until 1870 Secretary of navy 1798 Loses cabinet status, 1947 Postmaster general 1829 Loses cabinet status, 1970 Secretary of interior 1849 Secretary of agriculture 1889 Secretary of commerce and labor 1903 Office divided in 1913 Secretary of commerce 1913 Secretary of labor 1913 Secretary of defense 1947 Subordinate to this secretary, without cabinet rank, are secretaries of army, navy, and air force Secretary of health, education, and welfare 1953 Office divided in 1979 Secretary of housing and urban development 1965 Secretary of transportation 1966 Secretary of energy 1977 Secretary of health and human services 1979 Secretary of education 1979 Secretary of veterans affairs 1989 crucial Ninth Amendment.
It declares that specifying certain rights shall not be construed to deny  or disparage others retained by the people.
In a gesture of reassurance to the states righters, he included the equally significant Tenth Amendment, which reserves all rights not explicitly delegated or prohibited by the federal Constitution to the States respectively, or to the people.
By preserving a strong central government while specifying protections for minority and individual liberties, Madisons amendments partially swung the federalist pendulum back in an antifederalist direction.
(See Amendments IX, in the Appendix.
) The first Congress also nailed other newly sawed government planks into place.
It created effective federal courts under the Judiciary Act of 1789.
The act organized the Supreme Court, with a chief justice and five associates, as well as federal district and circuit courts, and established the office of attorney general.
New Yorker John Jay, Madisons collaborator on  young Republics most seasoned diplomats, became the first chief justice of the United States.
The key figure in the new government was still smooth-faced Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, a native of the British West Indies.
Hamiltons genius was unquestioned, but critics claimed he loved his adopted country more than he loved his countrymen.
Doubts about his character and his loyalty to the republican experiment always swirled about his head.
Hamilton regarded himself as a kind of prime minister in Washingtons cabinet and on occasion thrust his hands into the affairs of other departments, including that of his archrival, Thomas Jefferson, who served as secretary of state.
A financial wizard, Hamilton set out immediately to correct the economic vexations that had crippled the Articles of Confederation.
His plan was to shape the fiscal policies of the administration in such a way as to favor the wealthier groups.
They, in turn, would gratefully lend the government monetary and political support.
The new federal regime would thrive, the propertied classes would fatten, and prosperity would trickle down to the masses.
The youthful financiers first objective was to bolster the national credit.
Without public confidence in the government, Hamilton could not secure the funds with which to float his risky schemes.
He therefore boldly urged Congress to fund the entire national debt at par and to assume completely the debts incurred by the states during the recent war.
Funding at par meant that the federal government would pay off its debts at face value, plus accumulated interesta then-enormous total of more than $54 million.
So many people believed the He smote the rock of the national resources, and abundant streams of revenue gushed forth.
He touched the dead corpse of public credit, and it sprung upon its feet.
infant Treasury incapable of meeting those obligations that government bonds had depreciated to ten or fifteen cents on the dollar.
Yet speculators held fistfuls of them, and when Congress passed Hamiltons measure in 1790, they grabbed for more.
Some of them galloped into rural areas ahead of the news, buying for a song the depreciated paper holdings of farmers, war veterans, and widows.
Hamilton was willing, even eager, to have the new government shoulder additional obligations.
While pushing the funding scheme, he urged Congress to assume the debts of the states, totaling some $21.5 million.
The secretary made a convincing case for assumption.
The state debts could be regarded as a proper national obligation, for they had been incurred in the war for independence.
But foremost in Hamiltons thinking was the belief that assumption would chain the states more tightly to the federal chariot.
Thus the secretarys maneuver would shift the attachment of wealthy creditors from the states to the federal government.
The support of the rich for the national administration was a crucial link in Hamiltons political strategy of strengthening the central government.
States burdened with heavy debts, like Massachusetts, were delighted by Hamiltons proposal.
States with small debts, like Virginia, were less charmed.
The stage was set for some old-fashioned horse trading.
Virginia did not want the state debts assumed, but it did want the forthcoming federal district*now the District of Columbiato be located on the Potomac River.
It would thus gain in commerce and prestige.
Hamilton persuaded a reluctant Jefferson, who had recently come home from France, to line up enough votes in Congress for assumption.
In return, Virginia would have the federal district on the Potomac.
The bargain was carried through in 1790.
The new ship of state thus set sail dangerously overloaded.
The national debt had swelled to $75 million owing to Hamiltons insistence on honoring the outstanding federal and state obligations alike.
Anyone less determined to establish such a healthy public credit could have sidestepped $13 million in back interest and could have avoided the state debts entirely.
But Hamilton, Father of the National Debt, was not greatly worried.
His objectives were as much political as economic.
He believed that within limits, a national debt was a national blessinga kind of union adhesive.
The more creditors to whom the government owed money, the more people there would be with a personal stake in the success of his ambitious enterprise.
His unique contribution was to make a debtordinarily a liabilityan asset for vitalizing the financial system as well as the government itself.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 *Authorized by the Constitution, Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
Where was the money to come from to pay interest on this huge debt and run the government?
Hamiltons first answer was customs duties, derived from a tariff.
Tariff revenues, in turn, depended on a vigorous foreign trade, another crucial link in Hamiltons overall economic strategy for the new Republic.
The first tariff law, imposing a low tariff of about 8 percent on the value of dutiable imports, was speedily passed by the first Congress in 1789, even before Hamilton was sworn in.
Revenue was by far the main goal, but the measure was also designed to erect a low protective wall around infant industries, which bawled noisily for more shelter than they received.
Hamilton had the vision to see that the industrial revolution would soon reach America, and he argued strongly in favor of more protection for the well-to-do manufacturing groupsanother vital element in his economic program.
But  Congress was still dominated by the agricultural and commercial interests, and it voted only two slight increases in the tariff during Washingtons presidency.
Hamilton, with characteristic vigor, sought additional internal revenue and in 1791 secured from Congress an excise tax on a few domestic items, notably whiskey.
The new levy of seven cents a gallon was borne chiefly by the distillers who  lived in the backcountry, where the wretched roads forced the farmer to reduce (and liquify) bulky bushels of grain to horseback proportions.
Whiskey flowed so freely on the frontier in the form of distilled liquor that it was used for money.
As the capstone for his financial system, Hamilton proposed a Bank of the United States.
An enthusiastic admirer of most things English, he took as his model the Bank of England.
Specifically, he proposed a powerful private institution, of which the government would be the major stockholder and in which the federal Treasury would deposit its surplus monies.
The central government not only would have a convenient strongbox, but federal funds would stimulate business by remaining in circulation.
The bank would also print urgently needed paper money and thus provide a sound and stable national currency, badly needed since the days when the Continental dollar was not worth a Continental.
The proposed bank would indeed be useful.
But was it constitutional?
Jefferson, whose written opinion on this question Washington requested, argued vehemently against the bank.
There was, he insisted, no specific authorization in the Constitution for such a financial octopus.
He was convinced that all powers not specifically granted to the central government were reserved to the states, as provided in the about-tobe-ratified Bill of Rights (see Amendment X).
He therefore concluded that the states, not Congress, had the power to charter banks.
Believing that the Constitution should be interpreted literally or strictly, Jefferson and his states rights disciples zealously embraced the theory of strict  construction.
Hamilton, also at Washingtons request, prepared a brilliantly reasoned reply to Jeffersons arguments.
Hamilton in general believed that what the Constitution did not forbid it permitted; Jefferson, in contrast, generally believed that what it did not permit it forbade.
Hamilton boldly invoked the clause of the Constitution that stipulates that Congress may pass any laws necessary and proper to carry out the powers vested in the various government agencies (see Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
18).
The government was explicitly empowered to collect taxes and regulate trade.
In carrying out these basic functions, Hamilton argued, a national bank would be not only proper but necessary.
By inference or implicationthat is, by virtue of implied powersCongress would be fully justified in establishing the Bank of the United States.
In short, Hamilton contended for a loose or broad interpretation of the Constitution.
He and his federalist followers thus evolved the theory of loose construction by invoking the elastic clause of the Constitutiona precedent for enormous federal powers.
Hamiltons financial views prevailed.
His eloquent and realistic arguments were accepted by Washington, who reluctantly signed the bank measure into law.
This explosive issue had been debated with much heat in Congress, where the old NorthSouth cleavage still lurked ominously.
The most enthusiastic support for the bank naturally came from the commercial and financial centers of the North, whereas the strongest opposition arose from the agricultural South.
The Bank of the United States, as created by Congress in 1791, was chartered for twenty years.
Located in Philadelphia, it was to have a capital of $10 million, one-fifth of it owned by the federal government.
Stock was thrown open to public sale.
To the agreeable surprise of Hamilton, a milling crowd oversubscribed in less than two hours, pushing aside many would-be purchasers.
The Whiskey Rebellion, which flared up in southwestern Pennsylvania in 1794, sharply challenged the new national government.
Hamiltons high excise tax bore harshly on these homespun pioneer folk.
They regarded it not as a tax on a frivolous luxury but as a burden on an economic necessity and a medium of exchange.
Even preachers of the gospel were paid in Old Monongahela rye.
Rye and corn crops distilled into alcohol were more cheaply transported to eastern markets than bales of grain.
Defiant distillers finally erected whiskey poles, similar to the liberty poles of antistamp tax days in 1765, and raised the cry Liberty and No Excise.
Boldly tarring and feathering revenue officers, they brought collections to a halt.
President Washington, once a revolutionist, was alarmed by what he called these self-created societies.
With the hearty encouragement of Hamilton, he summoned the militia of several states.
Anxious moments followed the call, for there was much doubt as to whether men in other states would muster to crush a rebellion in a sister state.
Despite some opposition, an army of about thirteen thousand rallied to the colors, and two widely separated columns marched briskly forth in a gorgeous, leaftinted Indian summer, until knee-deep mud slowed their progress.
When the troops reached the hills of western Pennsylvania, they found no insurrection.
The Whiskey Boys were overawed, dispersed, or captured.
Washington, with an eye to healing old sores, pardoned the two small-fry convicted culprits.
The Whiskey Rebellion was minusculesome three rebels were killedbut its consequences were mighty.
George Washingtons government, now substantially strengthened, commanded a new respect.
Yet the foes of the administration condemned its brutal display of forcefor having used a sledgehammer to crush a gnat.
Almost overnight, Hamiltons fiscal feats had established the governments sound credit rating.
The Treasury could now borrow needed funds in the Netherlands on favorable terms.
But Hamiltons financial successesfunding, assumption, the excise tax, the bank, the suppression of the Whiskey Rebellioncreated some political liabilities.
All these schemes encroached sharply upon states rights.
Many Americans, dubious about the new Constitution in the first place, might never have approved it if they had foreseen how the states C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 I saw the operation to be unequal in this country.
It is true that the excise paid by the country would be that only on spirits consumed in it.
But even in the case of exports, the excise must be advanced in the first instance by the distiller and this would prevent effectually all the poorer part from carrying on the business.
would have preferred a direct tax with a view to reach unsettled lands which all around us have been purchased by speculating men.
were going to be overshadowed by the federal colossus.
Now, out of resentment against Hamiltons  revenue-raising and centralizing policies, an organized opposition began to build.
What once was a personal feud between Hamilton and Jefferson developed into a full-blown and frequently bitter political rivalry.
National political parties, in the modern sense, were unknown in America when George Washington took his inaugural oath.
There had been Whigs and Tories, federalists and antifederalists, but these groups were factions rather than parties.
They had sprung into existence over hotly contested special issues; they had faded away when their cause had triumphed or fizzled.
The Founders at Philadelphia had not envisioned the existence of permanent political parties.
Organized opposition to the governmentespecially a democratic government based on popular consentseemed tainted with disloyalty.
Opposition to the government affronted the spirit of national unity that the glorious cause of the Revolution had inspired.
The notion of a formal party apparatus was thus a novelty in the 1790s, and when Jefferson and Madison first organized their opposition to the Hamiltonian program, they confined their activities to Congress and did not anticipate creating a long-lived and popular party.
But as their c.
1792 Federalists Democratic-Republicans c.
1816 Death of Federalists c.
1820 Republicans One party: Era of Good Feelings c.
1825 National Republicans Democratic-Republicans (Jacksonian Democrats) 1834 Whigs Democrats 1854 Republicans To Present To Present *See Appendix (Presidential Elections ) for third parties.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 antagonism to Hamilton stiffened, and as the amazingly boisterous and widely read newspapers of the day spread their political message, and Hamiltons, among the people, primitive semblances of political parties began to emerge.
The two-party system has existed in the United States since that time (see table on p.
197).
Ironically, in light of early suspicions about the very legitimacy of parties, their competition for power has actually proved to be among the indispensable ingredients of a sound democracy.
The party out of powerthe loyal oppositiontraditionally plays the invaluable role of the balance wheel on the machinery of government, ensuring that politics never drifts too far out of kilter with the wishes of the people.
When Washingtons first administration ended early in 1793, Hamiltons domestic policies had already stimulated the formation of two political camps Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans and Hamiltonian Federalists.
As Washingtons second term began, foreign-policy issues brought the differences between them to a fever pitch.
Only a few weeks after Washingtons inauguration in 1789, the curtain had risen on the first act  of the French Revolution.
Twenty-six years were  to pass before the seething continent of Europe  collapsed into a peace of exhaustion.
Few nonAmerican events have left a deeper scar on American political and social life.
In a sense the French Revolution was misnamed: it was a revolution that sent tremors through much of the civilized world.
In its early stages, the upheaval was surprisingly peaceful, involving as it did a successful attempt to impose constitutional shackles on Louis XVI.
The American people, loving liberty and deploring despotism, cheered.
They were flattered to think that the outburst in France was but the second chapter of their own glorious Revolution, as to some extent it was.
Only a few ultraconservative Federalistsfearing change, reform, and leveling principleswere from the outset dubious or outspokenly hostile to the despicable mobocracy.
The more ardent Jeffersonians were overjoyed.
The French Revolution entered a more ominous phase in 1792, when France declared war on hostile Austria.
Powerful ideals and powerful armies alike were on the march.
Late in that year, the electrifying news reached America that French citizen armies Never was the memory of a man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and humane monarch.
He was guillotined in effigy, in the capital of the Union [Philadelphia], twenty or thirty times every day, during one whole winter and part of the summer.
Men, women and children flocked to the tragical exhibition, and not a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it.
had hurled back the invading foreigners and that France had proclaimed itself a republic.
Americans enthusiastically sang The Marseillaise and other rousing French Revolutionary songs, and they renamed thoroughfares with democratic flare.
King Street in New York, for example, became Liberty Street, and in Boston, Royal Exchange Alley became Equality Lane.
But centuries of pent-up poison could not be purged without baleful results.
The guillotine was set up, the king was beheaded in 1793, the church was attacked, and the head-rolling Reign of Terror was begun.
Back in America, God-fearing Federalist aristocrats nervously fingered their tender white necks and eyed the Jeffersonian masses apprehensively.
Lukewarm Federalist approval of the early Revolution turned, almost overnight, to heated talk of blood-drinking cannibals.
Sober-minded Jeffersonians regretted the bloodshed.
But they felt, with Jefferson, that one could not expect to be carried from despotism to liberty in a feather bed and that a few thousand aristocratic heads were a cheap price to pay for human freedom.
Such approbation was shortsighted, for dire peril loomed ahead.
The earlier battles of the French Revolution had not hurt America directly, but now Britain was sucked into the contagious conflict.
The conflagration speedily spread to the New World, where it vividly affected the expanding young American Republic.
Thus was repeated the familiar story of every major European war, beginning with 1689, that involved a watery duel for control of the Atlantic Ocean.
(See the table on p.
111.
) Ominously, the Franco-American alliance of 1778 was still on the books.
By its own terms it was to last forever.
It bound the United States to help the French defend their West Indies against future foes, and the booming British fleets were certain to attack these strategic islands.
Many Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans favored honoring the alliance.
Aflame with the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, red-blooded Jeffersonians were eager to enter the conflict against Britain, the recent foe, at the side of France, the recent friend.
America owed France its freedom, they argued, and now was the time to pay the debt of gratitude.
But President George Washington, levelheaded as usual, was not swayed by the clamor of the crowd.
Backed by Hamilton, he believed that war had to be avoided at all costs.
Washington was coolly playing for enormous stakes.
The nation in 1793 was militarily weak, economically wobbly, and politically disunited.
But solid foundations were being laid, and American cradles were continuing to rock a bumper crop of babies.
Washington wisely reasoned that if America could avoid the broils of Europe for a generation or so, it would then be populous enough and powerful enough to assert its maritime rights with strength and success.
Otherwise it might invite catastrophe.
The strategy of delayof playing for time while the birthrate fought Americas battleswas a cardinal policy of the Founding Fathers.
Hamilton and Jefferson, often poles apart on other issues, were in agreement here.
Accordingly, Washington boldly issued his Neutrality Proclamation in 1793, shortly after the outbreak of war between Britain and France.
This epochal document not only proclaimed the governments official neutrality in the widening conflict but sternly warned American citizens to be impartial toward both armed camps.
As Americas first  formal declaration of aloofness from Old World quarrels, Washingtons Neutrality Proclamation proved to be a major prop of the spreading isolationist tradition.
It also proved to be enormously controversial.
The pro-French Jeffersonians were enraged by the Neutrality Proclamation, especially by Washingtons method of announcing it unilaterally, without consulting Congress.
The pro-British Federalists were heartened.
Debate soon intensified.
An impetuous, thirtyyear-old representative of the French Republic, Citizen Edmond Gent, had landed at Charleston, South Carolina.
With unrestrained zeal he undertook to fit out privateers and otherwise take advantage of the existing Franco-American alliance.
The giddy-headed envoyall sail and no anchorwas soon swept away by his enthusiastic reception by the Jeffersonian Republicans.
He foolishly came to believe that the Neutrality Proclamation did not reflect the true wishes of the American people, and he consequently embarked upon unneutral activity not authorized by the French allianceincluding the recruitment of armies to invade Spanish Florida and Louisiana, as well as British Canada.
Even Madison and Jefferson were soon disillusioned by his conduct.
After he threatened to appeal over the head of Old Washington to the sovereign voters, the president demanded Gents withdrawal, and the Frenchman was replaced by a less impulsive emissary.
Washingtons Neutrality Proclamation clearly illustrates the truism that self-interest is the basic cement of alliances.
In 1778 both France and America stood to gain; in 1793 only France.
Technically, the Americans did not flout their obligation because France never officially called upon them to honor it.
American neutrality in fact favored France.
The French West Indies urgently needed Yankee foodstuffs.
If the Americans had entered the war at Frances side, the British fleets would have blockaded the American coast and cut off those essential supplies.
America was thus much more useful to France as a reliable neutral provider than as a blockaded partner-in-arms.
President Washingtons far-visioned policy of neutrality was sorely tried by the British.
For ten long years, they had been retaining the chain of northern frontier posts on U.S.
soil, all in defiance of the peace treaty of 1783.
The London government was reluctant to abandon the lucrative fur trade in the Great Lakes region and also hoped to build up an Indian buffer state to contain the ambitious Americans.
British agents openly sold firearms and firewater to the Indians of the Miami Confederacy, an alliance of eight Indian nations who terrorized Americans invading their lands.
Little Turtle, war chief of the Miamis, gave notice that the confederacy regarded the Ohio River as the United States northwestern, and their own southeastern, border.
In 1790 and 1791, Little Turtles braves defeated armies led by Generals Josiah Harmar and Arthur St.
Clair, killing hundreds of soldiers and handing the United States what remains one of its worst defeats in the history of the frontier.
But in 1794, when a new army under General Mad Anthony Wayne routed the Miamis at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, the British refused to shelter Indians fleeing from the battle.
Abandoned when it counted by their red-coated friends, the Indians soon offered Wayne the peace pipe.
In the Treaty of Greenville, signed in August 1795, the confederacy gave up vast tracts of the Old Northwest, including most of present-day Indiana and Ohio.
In exchange the Indians received a lump-sum payment of $20,000, an annual annuity of $9,000, the right to hunt the lands they had ceded, and, most important, what they hoped was recognition of their sovereign status.
Although the treaty codified an unequal relationship, the Indians felt that it put some limits on the ability of the United States to decide the fate of Indian peoples.
On the sea frontier, the British were eager to starve out the French West Indies and naturally expected the United States to defend them under the Franco-American alliance.
Hard-boiled commanders of the Royal Navy, ignoring Americas rights as a neutral, struck savagely.
They seized about three hundred American merchant ships in the West Indies, impressed scores of seamen into service on British vessels, and threw hundreds of others into foul dungeons.
These actions incensed patriotic Americans.
A mighty outcry arose, chiefly from Jeffersonians, that America should once again fight George III in defense of its liberties.
At the very least, it should cut off all supplies to its oppressor through a nationwide embargo.
But the Federalists stoutly resisted all demands for drastic action.
Hamiltons high hopes for economic development depended on trade with Britain.
War with the worlds mightiest commercial empire would pierce the heart of the Hamiltonian financial system.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 Niagara Dutchmans     Point Point au Fer Oswegatchie Detroit Fort Michilimackinac Oswego B R I T I S H       C A N A D A American Posts Held by the British After 1783 President Washington, in a last desperate gamble to avert war, decided to send Chief Justice John Jay to London in 1794.
The Jeffersonians were acutely unhappy over the choice, partly because they feared that so notorious a Federalist and Anglophile would sell out his country.
Arriving in London, Jay gave  the Jeffersonians further cause for alarm when, at the presentation ceremony, he routinely kissed the queens hand.
Unhappily, Jay entered the negotiations with weak cards, which were further sabotaged by Hamilton.
The latter, fearful of war with Britain, secretly supplied the British with the details of Americas bargaining strategy.
Not surprisingly, Jay won few concessions.
The British did promise to evacuate the chain of posts on U.S.
soila pledge that inspired little confidence, since it had been made before in Paris (to the same John Jay!
) in 1783.
In addition, Britain consented to pay damages for the recent seizures of American ships.
But the British stopped short of pledging anything about about supplying arms to Indians.
And they forced Jay to give ground by binding the United States to pay the debts still owed to British merchants on preRevolutionary accounts.
Jays unpopular pact, more than any other issue, vitalized the newborn Democratic-Republican party of Thomas Jefferson.
When the Jeffersonians learned of Jays concessions, their rage was fearful to behold.
The treaty seemed like an abject surrender to Britain, as well as a betrayal of the Jeffersonian South.
Southern planters would have to pay the major share of the pre-Revolutionary debts, while rich Federalist shippers were collecting damages for recent British seizures.
Jeffersonian mobs hanged, burned, and guillotined in effigy that damnd archtraitor, Sir John Jay.
Even George Washingtons huge popularity was compromised by the controversy over the treaty.
Jays Treaty had other unforeseen consequences.
Fearing that the treaty foreshadowed an Anglo-American alliance, Spain moved hastily to strike a deal with the United States.
Pinckneys Treaty of 1795 with Spain granted the Americans virtually everything they demanded, including free navigation of the Mississippi and the large disputed territory north of Florida.
(See the map on p.
175.
) Exhausted after the diplomatic and partisan battles of his second term, President Washington decided to retire.
His choice contributed powerfully to establishing a two-term tradition for American presidents.
* In his Farewell Address to the nation in 1796 (never delivered orally but printed in the newspapers), Washington strongly advised the avoidance of permanent alliances like the still-vexatious Franco-American Treaty of 1778.
Contrary to general misunderstanding, Washington did not oppose all alliances, but favored only temporary alliances for extraordinary emergencies.
This was admirable advice for a weak and divided nation in 1796.
But what is sound counsel for a young stripling may not apply later to a mature and muscular giant.
Washingtons contributions as president were enormous, even though the sparkling Hamilton at times seemed to outshine him.
The central government, its fiscal feet now under it, was solidly established.
The West was expanding.
The merchant marine was plowing the seas.
Above all, Washington had kept the nation out of both overseas entanglements and foreign wars.
The experimental stage had passed, and the presidential chair could now be turned over to a less impressive figure.
But republics are notoriously ungrateful.
When Washington left office in 1797, he was showered with the brickbats of partisan abuse, quite in contrast with the bouquets that had greeted his arrival.
And as to you, sir, treacherous in private friendship (for so you have been to me, and that in the day of danger) and a hypocrite in public life, the world will be puzzled to decide, whether you are an apostate or an imposter; whether you have abandoned good principles, or whether you ever had any.
*Not broken until 1940 by Franklin D. Roosevelt and made a part of the Constitution in 1951 by the Twenty-second Amendment.
Who should succeed the exalted Father of His Country?
Alexander Hamilton was the best-known member of the Federalist party, now that Washington had bowed out.
But his financial policies, some of which had fattened the speculators, had made him so unpopular that he could not hope to be elected president.
The Federalists were forced to turn to Washingtons vice president, the experienced but ungracious John Adams, a rugged chip off old Plymouth Rock.
The Democratic-Republicans naturally rallied behind their master organizer and leader, Thomas Jefferson.
Political passions ran feverishly high in the presidential campaign of 1796.
The lofty presence of Washington had hitherto imposed some restraints; now the lid was off.
Cultured Federalists like Fisher Ames referred to the Jeffersonians as fire-eating salamanders, poison-sucking toads.
Federalists and Democratic-Republicans even drank their ale in separate taverns.
The issues of the campaign, as it turned out, focused heavily on personalities.
But  the Jeffersonians again assailed the too-forceful crushing of the Whiskey Rebellion and, above all, the negotiation of Jays hated treaty.
John Adams, with most of his support in New England, squeezed through by the narrow margin of 71 votes to 68 in the Electoral College.
Jefferson, as runner-up, became vice president.
* One of the ablest statesmen of his day, Adams at sixty-two was a stuffy figure.
Sharp-featured, bald, relatively short (five feet seven inches), and thickset (His Rotundity), he impressed observers as a man of stern principles who did his duty with stubborn devotion.
Although learned and upright, he was a tactless and prickly intellectual aristocrat, with no appeal to the masses and with no desire to cultivate any.
Many citizens regarded him with respectful irritation.
The crusty New Englander suffered from other handicaps.
He had stepped into Washingtons C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 *The possibility of such an inharmonious two-party combination in the future was removed by the Twelfth Amendment to the Constitution in 1804.
(See text in the Appendix.
)  He is vain, irritable, and a bad calculator of the force and probable effect of the motives which govern men.
This is all the ill which can possibly be said of him.
He is as disinterested as the Being who made him.
shoes, which no successor could hope to fill.
In addition, Adams was hated by Hamilton, who had resigned from the Treasury in 1795 and who now headed the war faction of the Federalist party, known as the High Federalists.
The famed financier even secretly plotted with certain members of the cabinet against the president, who had a conspiracy rather than a cabinet on his hands.
Adams regarded Hamilton as the most ruthless, impatient, artful, indefatigable and unprincipled intriguer in the United States, if not in the world.
Most ominous of all, Adams inherited a violent quarrel with Francea quarrel whose gunpowder lacked only a spark.
The French were infuriated by Jays Treaty.
They condemned it as the initial step toward an alliance with Britain, their perpetual foe.
They further assailed the pact as a flagrant violation of the Franco-American Treaty of 1778.
French warships, in retaliation, began to seize defenseless American merchant vessels, altogether about three hundred by mid-1797.
Adding insult to outrage, the Paris regime haughtily refused to receive Americas newly appointed envoy and even threatened him with arrest.
President Adams kept his head, temporarily, even though the nation was mightily aroused.
True to Washingtons policy of steering clear of war at all costs, he tried again to reach an agreement with the French and appointed a diplomatic commission of three men, including John Marshall, the future chief justice.
Adamss envoys, reaching Paris in 1797, hoped to meet Talleyrand, the crafty French foreign minister.
They were secretly approached by three gobetweens, later referred to as X, Y, and Z in the published dispatches.
The French spokesmen, among other concessions, demanded an unneutral loan of 32 million florins, plus what amounted to a bribe of $250,000, for the privilege of merely talking with Talleyrand.
These terms were intolerable.
The American trio knew that bribes were standard diplomatic devices in Europe, but they gagged at paying a quarter  of a million dollars for mere talk, without any  assurances of a settlement.
Negotiations quickly broke down, and John Marshall, on reaching New York in 1798, was hailed as a conquering hero for his  steadfastness.
War hysteria swept through the United States, catching up even President Adams.
The slogan of the hour became Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute.
The Federalists were delighted at this unexpected turn of affairs, whereas all except the most rabid Jeffersonians hung their heads  in shame over the misbehavior of their French friends.
War preparations in the United States were pushed along at a feverish pace, despite considerable Jeffersonian opposition in Congress.
The Navy Department was created; the three-ship navy  was expanded; the United States Marine Corps was established.
A new army of ten thousand men was authorized (but was never fully raised).
Bloodshed was confined to the sea, and principally to the West Indies.
In two and a half years  of undeclared hostilities (17981800), American  privateers and men-of-war of the new navy captured over eighty armed vessels flying the French colors, though several hundred Yankee merchant ships were lost to the enemy.
Only a slight push,  it seemed, might plunge both nations into a fulldress war.
Embattled France, its hands full in Europe, wanted no war.
An outwitted Talleyrand realized that to fight the United States would merely add one more foe to his enemy roster.
The British, who were lending the Americans cannon and other war supplies, were actually driven closer to their wayward cousins than they were to be again for many years.
Talleyrand therefore let it be known, through roundabout channels, that if the Americans would send a new minister, he would be received with proper respect.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 I will never send another minister to France without assurances that he will be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation.
This French furor brought to Adams a degree of personal acclaim that he had never known before and was never to know again.
He doubtless perceived that a full-fledged war, crowned by the conquest of the Floridas and Louisiana, would bring new plaudits to the Federalist partyand perhaps a second term to himself.
But the heady wine of popularity did not sway his final judgment.
He, like other Founding Fathers, realized full well that war must be avoided while the country was relatively weak.
Adams unexpectedly exploded a bombshell when, early in 1799, he submitted to the Senate the name of a new minister to France.
Hamilton and his war-hawk faction were enraged.
But public opinionJeffersonian and reasonable Federalist alike was favorable to one last try for peace.
Americas envoys (now three) found the political skies brightening when they reached Paris early in 1800.
The ambitious Little Corporal, the Corsican Napoleon Bonaparte, had recently seized dictatorial power.
He was eager to free his hands of the American squabble so that he might continue to redraw the map of Europe and perhaps create a New World empire in Louisiana.
The afflictions and ambitions of the Old World were again working to Americas advantage.
After a great deal of haggling, a memorable treaty known as the Convention of 1800 was signed in Paris.
France agreed to annul the twenty-twoyear-old marriage of (in)convenience, but as a kind of alimony the United States agreed to pay the damage claims of American shippers.
So ended the nations only peacetime military alliance for a century and a half.
Its troubled history does much to explain the traditional antipathy of the American people to foreign entanglements.
John Adams, flinty to the end, deserves immense credit for his belated push for peace, even though he was moved in part by jealousy of Hamilton.
Adams not only avoided the hazards of war, but also unwittingly smoothed the path for the peaceful purchase of Louisiana three years later.
He should indeed rank high among the forgotten purchasers of this vast domain.
If America had drifted into a fullblown war with France in 1800, Napoleon would not have sold Louisiana to Jefferson on any terms in 1803.
President Adams, the bubble of his popularity pricked by peace, was aware of his signal contribution to the nation.
He later suggested as the epitaph for his tombstone (not used), Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with France in the year 1800.
Exulting Federalists had meanwhile capitalized on the anti-French frenzy to drive through Congress in 1798 a sheaf of laws designed to muffle or minimize their Jeffersonian foes.
The first of these oppressive laws was aimed at supposedly pro-Jeffersonian aliens.
Most European immigrants, lacking wealth, were scorned by the aristocratic Federalist party.
But they were welcomed as voters by the less prosperous and more democratic Jeffersonians.
The Federalist Congress, hoping to discourage the dregs of Europe, erected a disheartening barrier.
They raised the residence requirements for aliens who desired to become citizens from a tolerable five years to an intolerable fourteen.
This drastic new law violated the traditional American policy of open-door hospitality and speedy assimilation.
Two additional Alien Laws struck heavily at undesirable immigrants.
The president was empowered to deport dangerous foreigners in time of The reign of Mr.
Adams has, hitherto,  been one continued tempest of  passions.
As president, he has never opened his lips, or lifted his pen, without threatening and scolding.
The grand object of his administration has been to exasperate the rage of contending parties, to calumniate and destroy every man who differs from his opinions.
Every person holding an office must either quit it, or think and vote exactly with Mr.
Adams.
peace and to deport or imprison them in time of hostilities.
Though defensible as a war measure and an officially declared war with France seemed imminentthis was an arbitrary grant of executive power contrary to American tradition and to the spirit of the Constitution, even though the stringent Alien Laws were never enforced.
The lockjaw Sedition Act, the last measure of the Federalist clampdown, was a direct slap at two priceless freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution by the Bill of Rightsfreedom of speech and freedom of the press (First Amendment).
This law provided that anyone who impeded the policies of the government or falsely defamed its officials, including the president, would be liable to a heavy fine and imprisonment.
Severe though the measure was, the Federalists believed that it was justified.
The verbal violence of the day was unrestrained, and foulpenned editors, some of them exiled aliens, vilified Adamss anti-French policy in vicious terms.
Many outspoken Jeffersonian editors were indicted under the Sedition Act, and ten were brought to trial.
All of them were convicted, often by packed juries swayed by prejudiced Federalist judges.
Some of the victims were harmless partisans, who should have been spared the notoriety  of martyrdom.
Among them was Congressman Matthew Lyon (the Spitting Lion), who had earlier gained fame by spitting in the face of a Federalist.
He was sentenced to four months in jail for writing of President Adamss unbounded thirst for ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation, and selfish avarice.
Another culprit was lucky to get off with a fine of $100 after he had expressed the wish that the wad of a cannon fired in honor of Adams had landed in the seat of the presidents breeches.
The Sedition Act seemed to be in direct conflict with the Constitution.
But the Supreme Court, dominated by Federalists, was of no mind to declare this Federalist law unconstitutional.
(The Federalists intentionally wrote the law to expire in 1801, so that it could not be used against them if they lost the next election.
) This attempt by the Federalists to crush free speech and silence the opposition party, high-handed as it was, undoubtedly made many converts for the Jeffersonians.
Yet the Alien and Sedition Acts, despite pained outcries from the Jeffersonians they muzzled, commanded widespread popular support.
Anti-French hysteria played directly into the hands of witchhunting conservatives.
In the congressional elections of 17981799, the Federalists, riding a wave of popularity, scored the most sweeping victory of their entire history.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 Resentful Jeffersonians naturally refused to take the Alien and Sedition Laws lying down.
Jefferson himself feared that if the Federalists managed to choke free speech and free press, they would then wipe out other precious constitutional guarantees.
His own fledgling political party might even be stamped out of existence.
If this had happened, the country might have slid into a dangerous one-party dictatorship.
Fearing prosecution for sedition, Jefferson secretly penned a series of resolutions, which the Kentucky legislature approved in 1798 and 1799.
His friend and fellow Virginian James Madison drafted a similar but less extreme statement, which was adopted by the legislature of Virginia in 1798.
Both Jefferson and Madison stressed the compact theorya theory popular among English political philosophers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
As applied to America by the Jeffersonians, this concept meant that the thirteen sovereign states, in creating the federal government, had entered into a compact, or contract, regarding its jurisdiction.
The national government was consequently the agent or creation of the states.
Since water can rise no higher than its source, the individual states were the final judges of whether their agent had broken the compact by overstepping the authority originally granted.
Invoking this logic, Jeffersons Kentucky resolutions concluded that the federal regime  ers and that with regard to the Alien and Sedition Acts, nullificationa refusal to accept themwas the rightful remedy.
No other state legislatures, despite Jeffersons hopes, fell into line.
Some of them flatly refused to endorse the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions.
Others, chiefly in Federalist states, added ringing condemnations.
Many Federalists argued that the people, not the states, had made the original compact, and that it was up to the Supreme Courtnot the statesto nullify unconstitutional legislation passed by Congress.
This practice, though not specifically authorized by the Constitution, was finally adopted by the Supreme Court in 1803 (see p.
218).
The Virginia and Kentucky resolutions were a brilliant formulation of the extreme states rights view regarding the Unionindeed more sweeping in their implications than their authors had intended.
They were later used by southerners to support nullificationand ultimately secession.
Yet neither Jefferson nor Madison, as Founding Fathers of the Union, had any intention of breaking it up: they were groping for ways to preserve it.
Their resolutions were basically campaign documents designed to crystallize opposition to the Federalist party and to unseat it in the upcoming presidential election of 1800.
The only real nullification that Jefferson had in view was the nullification of Federalist abuses.
As the presidential contest of 1800 approached, the differences between Federalists and DemocraticRepublicans were sharply etched (see table on the next page).
As might be expected, most federalists of the pre-Constitution period (17871789) became Federalists in the 1790s.
Largely welded by Hamilton into an effective group by 1793, they openly advocated rule by the best people.
Those who own the country, remarked Federalist John Jay, ought to govern it.
With their intellectual arrogance and Tory tastes, Hamiltonians distrusted fullblown democracy as the fountain of all mischiefs and feared the swayability of the untutored common folk.
Hamiltonian Federalists also advocated a strong central government with the power to crush democratic excesses like Shayss Rebellion, protect the lives and estates of the wealthy, and subordinate the sovereignty-loving states.
They believed that government should support private enterprise, not interfere with it.
This attitude came naturally to the merchants, manufacturers, and shippers along the Atlantic seaboard, who made up the majority of Federalist support.
Farther inland, few Hamiltonians dwelled.
Federalists were also pro-British in foreign affairs.
Some of them still harbored mildly Loyalist sentiments from pre-Revolutionary days.
All of them recognized that foreign trade, especially with Britain, was a key cog in Hamiltons fiscal machinery.
Leading the anti-Federalists, who came eventually to be known as Democratic-Republicans or sometimes simply Republicans, was Thomas Jefferson.
Lanky and relaxed in appearance, lacking  personal aggressiveness, weak-voiced, and unable to deliver a rabble-rousing speech, he became a master political organizer through his ability to lead people rather than drive them.
His strongest appeal was to the middle class and to the underprivilegedthe dirt farmers, the laborers, the artisans, and the small shopkeepers.
Liberal-thinking Jefferson, with his aristocratic head set on a farmers frame, was a bundle of inconsistencies.
By one set of tests, he should have been a Federalist, for he was a Virginia aristocrat and slaveowner who lived in an imposing hilltop mansion at Monticello.
A so-called traitor to his upper class,  Jefferson cherished uncommon sympathy for the common people, especially the downtrodden, the oppressed, and the persecuted.
As he wrote in 1800, I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.
Jeffersonian Republicans demanded a weak central regime.
They believed that the best government was the one that governed least.
The bulk of the power, Jefferson argued, should be retained by the states.
There the people, in intimate contact with local affairs, could keep a more vigilant eye on their public servants.
Otherwise, a dictatorship might develop.
Central authoritya kind of necessary evilwas to be kept at a minimum through  a strict interpretation of the Constitution.
The national debt, which he saw as a curse illegitimately bequeathed to later generations, was to be paid off.
Jeffersonian Republicans, themselves primarily agrarians, insisted that there should be no special privileges for special classes, particularly manufacturers.
Agriculture, to Jefferson, was the favored branch of the economy.
He regarded farming as essentially ennobling; it kept people away from wicked cities, out in the sunshine and close to the sodand God.
Most of his followers naturally came from the agricultural South and Southwest.
Above all, Jefferson advocated the rule of the people.
But he did not propose thrusting the ballot into the hands of  government   pleonly by those men who were literate enough to inform themselves and wear the mantle of American citizenship worthily.
Universal education would have to precede universal suffrage.
The ignorant, he argued, were incapable of self-government.
But he had profound faith in the reasonableness and teachableness of the masses and in their collective wisdom when taught.
Landlessness among American citizens threatened popular democracy as much as illiteracy, in Jeffersons eyes.
He feared that propertyless dependC HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 Rule by the best people Rule by the informed masses Hostility to extension of democracy Friendliness toward extension of democracy A powerful central government at the expense of A weak central government so as to preserve states states rights rights Loose interpretation of Constitution Strict interpretation of Constitution Government to foster business; concentration of No special favors for business; agriculture preferred wealth in interests of capitalistic enterprise A protective tariff No special favors for manufacturers Pro-British (conservative Tory tradition) Pro-French (radical Revolutionary tradition) National debt a blessing, if properly funded National debt a bane; rigid economy An expanding bureaucracy Reduction of federal officeholders A powerful central bank Encouragement to state banks Restrictions on free speech and press Relatively free speech and press Concentration in seacoast area Concentration in South and Southwest; in agricultural areas and backcountry A strong navy to protect shippers A minimal navy for coastal defense ents would be political pawns in the hands of their landowning superiors.
How could the emergence of a landless class of voters be avoided?
The answer, in part, was by slavery.
A system of black slave labor in the South ensured that white yeoman farmers could remain independent landowners.
Without slavery, poor whites would have to provide the cheap labor so necessary for the cultivation of tobacco and rice, and their low wages would preclude their ever owning property.
Jefferson thus tortuously reconciled slaveholdinghis own includedwith his more democratic impulses.
Yet for his time, Jeffersons confidence that white, free men could become responsible and knowledgeable citizens was open-minded.
He championed their freedom of speech, for without free speech, the misdeeds of tyranny could not be exposed.
Jefferson even dared to say that given the choice of a government without newspapers and newspapers without a government, he would opt for the latter.
Yet no other American leader, except perhaps Abraham Lincoln, ever suffered more foul abuse from editorial pens; Jefferson might well have prayed for freedom  Jeffersonian Republicans, unlike the Federalist British boot-lickers, were basically pro-French.
They earnestly believed that it was to Americas advantage to support the liberal ideals of the French Revolution, rather than applaud the reaction of the British Tories.
So as the young Republics first full decade of nationhood came to a close, the Founders hopes seemed already imperiled.
Conflicts over domestic politics and foreign policy undermined the unity of the Revolutionary era and called into question the very viability of the American experiment in democracy.
As the presidential election of 1800 approached, the danger loomed that the fragile and battered American ship of state, like many another before it and after it, would founder on the rocks of controversy.
The shores of history are littered with the wreckage of nascent nations torn asunder before they could grow to a stable maturity.
Why should the United States expect to enjoy a happier fate?
While we have land to labor then, let us never wish to see our citizens occupied at a work-bench, or twirling a distaff.
For the general operations of manufacture, let our workshops remain in Europe.
The mobs of great cities add just so much to the support of pure government, as sores do to the strength of the human body.
C HAPTER 10 Launching the New Ship of State, 17891800 Constitution formally put into effect Judiciary Act of 1789 Washington elected president French Revolution begins First official census Bill of Rights adopted Vermont becomes fourteenth state Bank of the United States created Excise tax passed Washington reelected president Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties formed Louis XVI beheaded; radical phase of French Revolution France declares war on Britain and Spain Washingtons Neutrality Proclamation Citizen Gent affair Whiskey Rebellion Battle of Fallen Timbers Jays Treaty with Britain Treaty of Greenville: Indians cede Ohio Pinckneys Treaty with Spain Washingtons Farewell Address Adams becomes president XYZ Affair Alien and Sedition Acts Virginia and Kentucky resolutions Undeclared war with France Convention of 1800: peace with France For further reading, see page A7 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic  18001812 T HOMAS J EFFERSON , 1796 I n the critical presidential contest of 1800, the first in which Federalists and Democratic-Republicans functioned as two national political parties, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson again squared off against each other.
The choice seemed clear and dramatic: Adamss Federalists waged a defensive struggle for strong central government and public order.
Their Jeffersonian opponents presented themselves as the guardians of agrarian purity, liberty, and states rights.
The next dozen years, however, would turn what seemed like a clear-cut choice in 1800 into a messier reality, as the Jeffersonians in power were confronted with a series of opportunities and crises requiring the assertion of federal authority.
As the first challengers to rout a reigning party, the Republicans were the first to learn that it is far easier to condemn from the stump than to govern consistently.
In fighting for survival, the Federalists labored under heavy handicaps.
Their Alien and Sedition Acts had aroused a host of enemies, although most of these critics were dyed-in-the-wool Jeffersonians anyhow.
The Hamiltonian wing of the Federalist party, robbed of its glorious war with France, split openly with President Adams.
Hamilton, a victim of arrogance, was so indiscreet as to attack the president in a privately printed pamphlet.
Jeffersonians soon got hold of the pamphlet and gleefully published it.
The most damaging blow to the Federalists was the refusal of Adams to give them a rousing fight with France.
Their feverish war preparations had swelled the public debt and had required disagreeable new taxes, including a stamp tax.
After all these unpopular measures, the war scare had petered out, and the country was left with an all-dressed-up-but-noplace-to-go feeling.
The military preparations now seemed not only unnecessary but extravagant, as seamen for the new navy were called John Adamss Jackasses.
Adams himself was known, somewhat ironically, as the Father of the American Navy.
Thrown on the defensive, the Federalists concentrated their fire on Jefferson himself, who became the victim of one of Americas earliest whispering campaigns.
He was accused of having robbed a widow and her children of a trust fund and of having fathered numerous mulatto children by his own slave women.
(Jeffersons long-rumored intimacy with one of his slaves, Sally Hemmings, has been confirmed through DNA testing; see Examining the Evidence, p.
213.
) As a liberal in religion, Jefferson had earlier incurred the wrath of the orthodox clergy, largely through his successful struggle to separate church and state in his native Virginia.
Although Jefferson did believe in God, preachers throughout New England, stronghold  of Federalism and Congregationalism, thundered against his alleged atheism.
Old ladies of Federalist families, fearing Jeffersons election, even buried their Bibles or hung them in wells.
C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 the Bible would be cast into a bonfire, our holy worship changed into a dance of [French] Jacobin phrensy, our wives and daughters dishonored, and our sons converted into the disciples of Voltaire and the dragoons of Marat.
Debate over whether Thomas Jefferson had sexual relations with Sally Hemmings, a slave at Monticello, began as early as 1802, when James Callendar published the first accusations and Federalist newspapers gleefully broadcast them throughout the country.
Two years later, this print, The Philosophic Cock, attacked Jefferson by depicting him as a rooster and Hemmings as a hen.
The rooster or cock was also a symbol of revolutionary France.
His enemies sought to discredit him for personal indiscretions as well as radical sympathies.
Although Jefferson resolutely denied any affair with Hemmings, a charge that at first seemed only to be a politically motivated defamation refused to go away.
In the 1870s, two new oral sources of evidence came to light.
Madison Hemmings, Sallys next to last child, claimed that his mother had identified Thomas Jefferson as the father of all five of her children.
Soon thereafter, James Partons biography of Jefferson revealed that among Jeffersons white descendants it was said that his nephew had fathered all or most of Sallys children.
In the 1950s, several large publishing projects on Jeffersons life and writings uncovered new evidence and inspired renewed debate.
Most convincing was Dumas Malones calculation that Jefferson had been present at Monticello nine months prior to the birth of each of Sallys children.
Speculation continued throughout the rest of the century, with little new evidence, until the trustees of the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation agreed to a new, more scientific method of investigation: DNA testing of the remains of Jeffersons white and possibly black descendants.
Two centuries after James Callendar first cast aspersions on Thomas Jeffersons morality, cutting-edge science established with little doubt that Jefferson was the father of Sally Hemmingss children.
Jefferson won by a majority of 73 electoral votes to 65.
In defeat, the colorless and presumably unpopular Adams polled more electoral strength than he had gained four years earlierexcept for New York.
The Empire State fell into the Jeffersonian basket, and with it the election, largely because Aaron Burr, a master wire-puller, turned New York to Jefferson by the narrowest of margins.
The Virginian polled the bulk of his strength in the South and West, particularly in those states where universal white manhood suffrage had been adopted.
Jeffersonian joy was dampened by an unexpected deadlock.
Through a technicality Jefferson, the presidential candidate, and Burr, his vicepresidential running mate, received the same number of electoral votes for the presidency.
Under the Constitution the tie could be broken only by the House of Representatives (see Art.
II, Sec.
I, para.
This body was controlled for several more months by the lame-duck Federalists, who preferred Burr to the hated Jefferson.
* Voting in the House moved slowly to a climax, as exhausted representatives snored in their seats.
The agonizing deadlock was broken at last when a few Federalists, despairing of electing Burr and hoping for moderation from Jefferson, refrained from voting.
The election then went to the rightful candidate.
C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Adams  Federalist Jefferson  Republican Divided FRENCH LOUISIANA INDIANA TERRITORY NORTHWEST TERRITORY NORTH  CAROLINA 21 TENN.
3 KENTUCKY 4 VIRGINIA 21 SPANISH  FLORIDA MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY GEORGIA 4 SOUTH CAROLINA 8 MD.
10 DEL.
3 N.J.
7  PA.
15 N.Y.
12 CONN.
9 R.I.
4 MASS.
16 VT.
4 N.H.
6 Presidential Election of 1800  (with electoral vote by state) New York was the key state in this election, and Aaron Burr helped swing it away from the Federalists with tactics that anticipated the political machines of a later day.
Federalists complained that Burr travels every night from one meeting of Republicans to another, haranguing .
them to the most zealous exertions.
[He] can stoop so low as to visit every low tavern that may happen to be crowded with his dear fellow citizens.
But Burr proved that the price was worth it.
We have beat you, Burr told kid-gloved Federalists after the election, by superior *A lame duck has been humorously defined as a politician whose political goose has been cooked at the recent elections.
The possibility of another such tie was removed by the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 (for text, see the Appendix).
Before then, each elector had two votes, with the second-place finisher becoming vice president.
I have this morning witnessed one of the most interesting scenes a free people can ever witness.
The changes of administration, which in every government and in every  age have most generally been epochs of confusion, villainy and bloodshed, in this our happy country take place without any species of distraction, or disorder.
John Adams, as fate would have it, was the last Federalist president of the United States.
His party sank slowly into the mire of political oblivion and ultimately disappeared completely in the days of Andrew Jackson.
Jefferson later claimed that the election of 1800 was a revolution comparable to that of 1776.
But it was no revolution in the sense of a massive popular upheaval or an upending of the political system.
In truth, Jefferson had narrowly squeaked through to victory.
A switch of some 250 votes in New York would have thrown the election to Adams.
Jefferson meant that his election represented a return to what he considered the original spirit of the Revolution.
In his eyes Hamilton and Adams had betrayed the ideals of 1776 and 1787.
Jeffersons mission, as he saw it, was to restore the republican experiment, to check the growth of government power, and to halt the decay of virtue that had set in under Federalist rule.
No less revolutionary was the peaceful and orderly transfer of power on the basis of an election whose results all parties accepted.
This was a remarkable achievement for a raw young nation, especially after all the partisan bitterness that had agitated the country during Adamss presidency.
It was particularly remarkable in that age; comparable successions would not take place in Britain for another generation.
After a decade of division and doubt, Americans could take justifiable pride in the vigor of their experiment in democracy.
Long Tom Jefferson was inaugurated president on March 4, 1801, in the swampy village of Washington, the crude new national capital.
Tall (six feet, two  and a half inches), with large hands and feet, red  hair (the Red Fox), and prominent cheekbones  and chin, he was an arresting figure.
Believing that  the customary pomp did not befit his democratic ideals, he spurned a horse-drawn coach and  strode by foot to the Capitol from his boardinghouse.
Jeffersons inaugural address, beautifully phrased, was a classic statement of democratic principles.
The will of the majority is in all cases to prevail, Jefferson declared.
But, he added, that will to be rightful must be reasonable; the minority possess their equal rights, which equal law must protect, and to violate would be oppression.
Seeking to allay Federalist fears of a bull-in-the-china-closet overturn,  Jefferson ingratiatingly intoned, We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists.
As for foreign affairs, he pledged honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none.
With its rustic setting, Washington lent itself admirably to the simplicity and frugality of the Jeffersonian Republicans.
In this respect it contrasted sharply with the elegant atmosphere of Federalist Philadelphia, the former temporary capital.
Extending democratic principles to etiquette, Jefferson established the rule of pell-mell at official dinners that is, seating without regard to rank.
The resplendent British minister, who had enjoyed precedence among the pro-British Federalists, was insulted.
As president, Jefferson could be shockingly unconventional.
He would receive callers in sloppy attireonce in a dressing gown and heelless slippers.
He started the precedent, unbroken until Woodrow Wilsons presidency 112 years later, of sending messages to Congress to be read by a clerk.
Personal appearances, in the Federalist manner, suggested too strongly a monarchical speech from the throne.
Besides, Jefferson was painfully conscious of his weak voice and unimpressive platform presence.
As if plagued by an evil spirit, Jefferson was forced to reverse many of the political principles he had so vigorously championed.
There were in fact two Thomas Jeffersons.
One was the scholarly private citizen, who philosophized in his study.
The other was the harassed public official, who made the disturbing discovery that bookish theories worked out differently in the noisy arena of practical politics.
The C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 If there be any among us who would wish  to dissolve this Union or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
open-minded Virginian was therefore consistently inconsistent; it is easy to quote one Jefferson to refute the other.
The triumph of Thomas Jeffersons DemocraticRepublicans and the eviction of the Federalists marked the first party overturn in American history.
The vanquished naturally feared that the victors would grab all the spoils of office for themselves.
But Jefferson, in keeping with his conciliatory inaugural address, showed unexpected moderation.
To the dismay of his office-seeking friends, the new president dismissed few public servants for political reasons.
Patronage-hungry Jeffersonians watched the Federalist appointees grow old in office and grumbled that few die, none resign.
Jefferson quickly proved an able politician.
He was especially effective in the informal atmosphere of a dinner party.
There he wooed congressional  representatives while personally pouring imported wines and serving the tasty dishes of his French cook.
In part Jefferson had to rely on his personal charm because his party was so weak-jointed.
Denied  the power to dispense patronage, the DemocraticRepublicans could not build a loyal political following.
Opposition to the Federalists was the chief glue holding them together, and as the Federalists faded, so did Democratic-Republican unity.
The era of welldeveloped, well-disciplined political parties still lay in the future.
At the outset Jefferson was determined to undo the Federalist abuses begotten by the anti-French hysteria.
The hated Alien and Sedition Acts had already expired.
The incoming president speedily pardoned the martyrs who were serving sentences under the Sedition Act, and the government remitted many fines.
Shortly after the Congress met, the Jeffersonians enacted the new naturalization law of 1802.
This act reduced the unreasonable requirement of fourteen years of residence to the previous and more reasonable requirement of five years.
Jefferson actually kicked away only one substantial prop of the Hamiltonian system.
He hated the excise tax, which bred bureaucrats and bore heavily on his farmer following, and he early persuaded Congress to repeal it.
His devotion to principle thus cost the federal government about a million dollars a year in urgently needed revenue.
Swiss-born and French-accented Albert Gallatin, Watchdog of the Treasury, proved to be as able a secretary of the treasury as Hamilton.
Gallatin the most extraordinary collection of talent,  of human knowledge, that has ever been gathered together at the White House, with the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson dined alone.
agreed with Jefferson that a national debt was a bane rather than a blessing and by strict economy succeeded in reducing it substantially while balancing the budget.
Except for excising the excise tax, the Jeffersonians left the Hamiltonian framework essentially intact.
They did not tamper with the Federalist programs for funding the national debt at par and assuming the Revolutionary War debts of the states.
They launched no attack on the Bank of the United States, nor did they repeal the mildly protective Federalist tariff.
In later years they embraced Federalism to such a degree as to recharter a bigger bank and to boost the protective tariff to higher levels.
Paradoxically, Jeffersons moderation thus further cemented the gains of the Revolution of 1800.
By shrewdly absorbing the major Federalist programs, Jefferson showed that a change of regime need not be disastrous for the defeated group.
His restraint pointed the way toward the two-party system that was later to become a characteristic feature of American politics.
The deathbed Judiciary Act of 1801 was one of the last important laws passed by the expiring Federalist Congress.
It created sixteen new federal judgeships and other judicial offices.
President Adams remained at his desk until nine oclock in the evening of his last day in office, supposedly signing the commissions of the Federalist midnight judges.
(Actually only three commissions were signed on his last day.
) This Federalist-sponsored Judiciary Act, though a long-overdue reform, aroused bitter resentment.
Packing these lifetime posts with anti-Jeffersonian partisans was, in Republican eyes, a brazen attempt by the ousted party to entrench itself in one of the three powerful branches of government.
Jeffersonians condemned the last-minute appointees in violent language, denouncing the trickery of the Federalists as open defiance of the peoples will, expressed emphatically at the polls.
The newly elected Republican Congress bestirred itself to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801 in  the year after its passage.
Jeffersonians thus swept sixteen benches from under the recently seated midnight judges.
Jeffersonians likewise had their knives sharpened for the scalp of Chief Justice John Marshall, whom Adams had appointed to the Supreme Court (as a fourth choice) in the dying days of his term.
The strong-willed Marshall, with his rasping voice and steel-trap mind, was a cousin of Thomas Jefferson.
Marshalls formal legal schooling had lasted only six weeks, but he dominated the Supreme Court with his powerful intellect and commanding personality.
He shaped the American legal tradition more profoundly than any other single  figure.
Marshall had served at Valley Forge during the Revolution.
While suffering there from cold and hunger, he had been painfully impressed with the drawbacks of feeble central authority.
The experience made him a lifelong Federalist, committed above all else to strengthening the power of the federal government.
States rights Jeffersonians condemned the crafty judges twistifications, but Marshall pushed ahead inflexibly on his Federalist course.
He served for about thirty days under a Federalist administration and thirty-four years under the administrations of Jefferson and subsequent presidents.
The Federalist party died out, but Marshall lived on, handing down Federalist decisions serenely for many more years.
For over three decades, the ghost of Alexander Hamilton spoke through the lanky, black-robed judge.
One of the midnight judges of 1801 presented John Marshall with a historic opportunity.
He was obscure William Marbury, whom President Adams had named a justice of the peace for the District of Columbia.
When Marbury learned that his commission was being shelved by the new secretary of state, James Madison, he sued for its delivery.
Chief Justice Marshall knew that his Jeffersonian rivals, entrenched in the executive branch, would hardly spring forward to enforce a writ to deliver the commission to his fellow Federalist Marbury.
He therefore dismissed Marburys suit, avoiding a direct political showdown.
But the wily Marshall snatched a victory from the jaws of this judicial defeat.
In explaining his ruling, Marshall said that the part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 on which Marbury tried to base his appeal was unconstitutional.
The act had attempted to assign to the Supreme Court powers that the Constitution had not foreseen.
In this self-denying opinion, Marshall greatly magnified the authority of the Courtand slapped at the Jeffersonians.
Until the case of  tion of who had the final authority to determine the meaning of the Constitution.
Jefferson in the KenC HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 tucky resolutions (1798) had tried to allot that right to the individual states.
But now his cousin on the Court had cleverly promoted the contrary principle of judicial reviewthe idea that the Supreme Court alone had the last word on the question of constitutionality.
In this landmark case, Marshall inserted the keystone into the arch that supports the tremendous power of the Supreme Court in American life.
* Marshalls decision regarding Marbury spurred the Jeffersonians to seek revenge.
Jefferson urged the impeachment of an arrogant and tart-tongued Supreme Court justice, Samuel Chase, who was so unpopular that Republicans named vicious dogs after him.
Early in 1804 impeachment charges against Chase were voted by the House of Representatives, which then passed the question of guilt or innocence on to the Senate.
The indictment by the House was based on high crimes, and misdemeanors, as specified in the Constitution.
Yet the evidence was plain that the intemperate judge had not been guilty of high crimes, but only of unrestrained partisanship and a big mouth.
The Senate failed to muster enough votes to convict and remove Chase.
The precedent thus established was fortunate.
From that day to this, no really serious attempt has been made to reshape the Supreme Court by the impeachment weapon.
Jeffersons illadvised attempt at judge breaking was a reassuring victory for the independence of the judiciary and for the separation of powers among the three branches of the federal government.
One of Jeffersons first actions as president was to reduce the military establishment to a mere police force of twenty-five hundred officers and men.
Critics called it penny-pinching, but Jeffersons reluctance to invest in soldiers and ships was less about money than about republican ideals.
Among his fondest hopes for America was that it might transcend the bloody wars and entangling alliances of Europe.
The United States would set an example for the world, forswearing military force and winning friends through peaceful coercion.
Also, the Republicans distrusted large standing armies as standing invitations to dictatorship.
Navies were less to be feared, as they could not march inland and endanger liberties.
Still, the farm-loving Jeffersonians saw little point in building a fleet that might only embroil the Republic in costly and corrupting wars far from Americas shores.
But harsh realities forced Jeffersons principles to bend.
Pirates of the North African Barbary States had long made a national industry of blackmailing and plundering merchant ships that ventured into the Mediterranean.
Preceding Federalist administrations, in fact, had been forced to buy protection.
At the time of the French crisis of 1798, when Americans were shouting, Millions for defense but not The Constitution is either a superior paramount law, unchangeable by ordinary means, or it is on a level with ordinary legislative acts, and like other acts, is alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it.
If the former part of the alternative be true, then a legislative act contrary to the constitution is not law; if the latter part be true, then written constitutions are absurd attempts, on the part of the people, to limit a power in its own nature illimitable.
It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.
If, then, the courts are to regard the Constitution, and the Constitution is superior to any ordinary act of the legislature, the Constitution, and not such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they are both applicable.
*The next invalidation of a federal law by the Supreme Court came fifty-four years later, with the explosive Dred Scott decision (see p.
417).
For impeachment, see Art.
I, Sec.
II, para.
5; Art.
I, Sec.
III, paras.
6, 7; Art.
II, Sec.
IV in the Appendix.
one cent for tribute, twenty-six barrels of blackmail dollars were being shipped to piratical Algiers.
War across the Atlantic was not part of the Jeffersonian visionbut neither was paying tribute to a pack of pirate states.
The showdown came in 1801.
The pasha of Tripoli, dissatisfied with his share of protection money, informally declared war on the United States by cutting down the flagstaff of the American consulate.
A gauntlet was thus thrown squarely into the face of Jeffersonthe noninterventionist, the pacifist, the critic of a big-ship navy, and the political foe of Federalist shippers.
He reluctantly rose to the challenge by dispatching the infant navy to the shores of Tripoli, as related in the song of the U.S.
Marine Corps.
After four years of intermittent fighting, marked by spine-tingling exploits, Jefferson succeeded in extorting a treaty of peace from Tripoli in 1805.
It was secured at the bargain price of only $60,000a sum representing ransom payments for captured Americans.
Small gunboats, which the navy had used with some success in the Tripolitan War, fascinated Jefferson.
Pledged to tax reduction, he advocated a large number of little coastal craftJeffs or the mosquito fleet, as they were contemptuously called.
He believed these fast but frail vessels would prove valuable in guarding American shores and need not embroil the Republic in diplomatic incidents on the high seas.
About two hundred tiny gunboats were constructed, democratically in small shipyards where votes could be made for Jefferson.
Often mounting only one unwieldy gun, they were sometimes more of a menace to the crew than to the prospective enemy.
During a hurricane and tidal wave at Savannah, Georgia, one of them was deposited eight miles inland in a cornfield, to the derisive glee of the Federalists.
They drank toasts to American gunboats as the best in the worldon land.
A secret pact, fraught with peril for America, was signed in 1800.
Napoleon Bonaparte induced the king of Spain to cede to France, for attractive considerations, the immense trans-Mississippi region of Louisiana, which included the New Orleans area.
Rumors of the transfer were partially confirmed in 1802, when the Spaniards at New Orleans withdrew the right of deposit guaranteed America by the treaty of 1795.
Deposit (warehouse) privileges were vital to frontier farmers who floated their produce down the Mississippi to its mouth, there to await oceangoing vessels.
A roar of anger rolled up the mighty river and into its tributary valleys.
American pioneers talked wildly of descending upon New Orleans, rifles in hand.
Had they done so, the nation probably would have been engulfed in war with both Spain and France.
Thomas Jefferson, both pacifist and antientanglement, was again on the griddle.
Louisiana in the senile grip of Spain posed no real threat; C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Four Barbary States of North Africa, c.
1805 America could seize the territory when the time was ripe.
But Louisiana in the iron fist of Napoleon, the preeminent military genius of his age, foreshadowed a dark and blood-drenched future.
The United States would probably have to fight to dislodge him; and because it alone was not strong enough to defeat his armies, it would have to seek allies, contrary to the deepening anti-alliance policy.
Hoping to quiet the clamor of the West, Jefferson moved decisively.
Early in 1803 he sent James Monroe to Paris to join forces with the regular minister there, Robert R. Livingston.
The two envoys were instructed to buy New Orleans and as much land to its east as they could get for a maximum of $10 million.
If these proposals should fail and the situation became critical, negotiations were to be opened with Britain for an alliance.
The day that France takes possession of New Orleans, Jefferson wrote, we must marry ourselves to the British fleet and nation.
That remark dramatically demonstrated Jeffersons dilemma.
Though a passionate hater of war and an enemy of entangling alliances, he was proposing to make an alliance with his old foe, Britain, against his old friend, France, in order to secure New Orleans.
At this critical juncture, Napoleon suddenly decided to sell all of Louisiana and abandon his dream of a New World empire.
Two developments prompted his change of mind.
First, he had failed in his efforts to reconquer the sugar-rich island of Santo Domingo, for which Louisiana was to serve as a source of foodstuffs.
Infuriated ex-slaves, ably led by the gifted Toussaint LOuverture, had put up a stubborn resistance that was ultimately broken.
Then the islands second line of defensemosquitoes carrying yellow feverhad swept away thousands of crack French troops.
Santo Domingo could not be had, except perhaps at a staggering cost; hence there was no need for Louisianas food supplies.
Damn sugar, damn coffee, damn colonies!
burst out Napoleon.
Second, Bonaparte was about to end the twenty-month lull in his deadly conflict with Britain.
Because the British controlled the seas, he feared that he might be forced to make them a gift of Louisiana.
Rather than drive America into the arms of Britain by attempting to hold the area, he decided to sell the huge wilderness to the Americans and pocket the money for his schemes nearer home.
Napoleon hoped that the United States, strengthened by Louisiana, would one day be a military and naval power that would thwart the ambitions of the lordly British in the New World.
The predicaments of France in Europe were again paving the way for Americas diplomatic successes.
Events now unrolled dizzily.
The American minister, Robert Livingston, pending the arrival of Monroe, was busily negotiating in Paris for a window on the Gulf of Mexico at New Orleans.
Suddenly, out of a clear sky, the French foreign minister asked him how much he would give for all Louisiana.
Scarcely able to believe his ears (he was partially deaf anyhow), Livingston nervously entered upon the negotiations.
After about a week of haggling, while the fate of North America trembled in the balance, treaties were signed on April 30, 1803, ceding Louisiana to the United States for about $15 million.
When the news of the bargain reached America, Jefferson was startled.
He had authorized his envoys to offer not more than $10 million for New Orleans and as much to the  get.
Instead they had signed three treaties that pledged $15 million for New Orleans, plus an immeasurable tract entirely to the  would more than double the size of the United States.
They had bought a wilderness to get a city.
Once again the two Jeffersons wrestled with each other: the theorist and former strict constructionist versus the realist and public official.
Where in his beloved Constitution was the president authorized to negotiate treaties incorporating a huge new expanse into the unionan expanse containing tens of thousands of Indian, white, and black inhabitants?
There was no such clause.
Conscience-stricken, Jefferson privately proposed that a constitutional amendment be passed.
But his friends pointed out in alarm that in the interval Napoleon, for whom thought was action, might suddenly withdraw the offer.
So Jefferson shamefacedly submitted the treaties to the Senate, while admitting to his associates that the purchase was unconstitutional.
The senators were less finicky than Jefferson.
Reflecting enthusiastic public support, they registered their prompt approval of the transaction.
Land-hungry Americans were not disposed to split constitutional hairs when confronted with perhaps the most magnificent real estate bargain in history828,000 square miles at about three cents an acre.
Jeffersons bargain with Napoleon was epochal.
Overnight he had avoided a possible rupture with France and the consequent entangling alliance  with England.
By scooping up Louisiana, America secured at one bloodless stroke the western half of the richest river valley in the world and further laid the foundations of a future major power.
The ideal of a great agrarian republic, as envisioned by Jefferson, would have elbowroom in the vast Valley of Democracy.
At the same time, the transfer established a precedent that was to be followed repeatedly: the acquisition of foreign territory and peoples by purchase.
The extent of the vast new area was more fully unveiled by a series of explorations under the direction of Jefferson.
In the spring of 1804, Jefferson sent his personal secretary, Meriwether Lewis, and a young army officer named William Clark to explore the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase.
Aided by the Shoshoni woman Sacajawea, Lewis and Clark ascended the Great Muddy (Missouri River) from  St.
Louis, struggled through the Rockies, and descended the Columbia River to the Pacific coast.
Lewis and Clarks two-and-one-half-year expedition yielded a rich harvest of scientific observations, maps, knowledge of the Indians in the region, and hair-raising wilderness adventure stories.
On the Great Plains, they marveled at the immense herds of buffalo, elk, deer, and antelope feeding in one common and boundless pasture.
Lewis was lucky to come back alive.
When he detached a group of just three other men to explore the Marias River in present-day western Montana, a band of teenage Blackfoot Indians, armed with crude muskets by British fur traders operating out of Canada, stole the horses of the small and vulnerable exploring party.
Lewis foolishly pursued the horse thieves on foot.
He shot one marauder through the belly, but the Indian returned the fire.
Being bareheaded, Lewis later wrote, I felt the wind of his bullet very distinctly.
After killing another Blackfoot and hanging one of the expeditions peace and friendship medals around the neck of the corpse as a warning C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 It is the case of a guardian, investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory; and saying to him when of age, I did this for your good;  I pretend to no right to bind you; you may disavow me, and I must get out of the scrape as I can; I thought it my duty to risk myself for you.
to other Indians, Lewis and his terrified companions beat it out of the Marias country to rejoin their main party on the Missouri River.
The explorers also demonstrated the viability of an overland trail to the Pacific.
Down the dusty track thousands of missionaries, fur-traders, and pioneering settlers would wend their way in the ensuing decades, bolstering Americas claim to the Oregon Country.
Other explorers also pushed into the uncharted West.
Zebulon M. Pike trekked to the headwaters of the Mississippi River in 18051806.
The next year Pike ventured into the southern  portion of the Louisiana territory, where he sighted the Colorado peak that bears his name.
In the long run, the Louisiana Purchase greatly expanded the fortunes of the United States and the power of the federal government.
In the short term, the vast expanse of territory and the feeble reach of the government obliged to control it raised fears of secession and foreign intrigue.
Aaron Burr, Jeffersons first-term vice president, played no small part in provokingand justifying such fears.
Dropped from the cabinet in Jeffersons second term, Burr joined with a group of Federalist extremists to plot the secession of New England and New York.
Alexander Hamilton, though no friend  of Jefferson, exposed and foiled the conspiracy.
Incensed, Burr challenged Hamilton to a duel.
Hamilton deplored the practice of dueling, by that date illegal in several states, but felt his honor was at stake.
He met Burrs challenge at the appointed hour but refused to fire.
Burr killed Hamilton with one shot.
Burrs pistol blew the brightest brain out of the Federalist party and destroyed its one remaining hope of effective leadership.
His political career as dead as Hamiltons, Burr turned his disunionist plottings to the trans-Mississippi West.
There he struck up an allegiance with General James Wilkinson, the unscrupulous military governor of Louisiana Territory and a sometime secret agent in the pay of the Spanish crown.
Burrs schemes are still shrouded in mystery, but he and Wilkinson apparently planned to separate the western part of the United States from the East and expand their new confederacy with invasions of Spanish-controlled Mexico and Florida.
In the fall of 1806, Burr and sixty followers floated in flatboats down the Mississippi River to meet Wilkinsons army at Natchez.
But when the general learned that Jefferson had gotten wind of the plot, he betrayed Burr and fled to New Orleans.
Burr was arrested and tried for treason.
In what seemed to the Jeffersonians to be bias in favor of the accused, Chief Justice John Marshall, strictly hewing C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Exploring the Louisiana Purchase and the West Seeking to avert friction with France by purchasing all of Louisiana, Jefferson bought trouble because of the vagueness of the boundaries.
Among the disputants were Spain in the Floridas, Spain and Mexico in the Southwest, and Great Britain in Canada.
to the Constitution, insisted that a guilty verdict required proof of overt acts of treason, not merely treasonous intentions (see Art.
III, Sec.
III).
Burr was acquitted and fled to Europe, where he urged Napoleon to make peace with Britain and launch a joint invasion of America.
Burrs insurrectionary brashness demonstrated that it was one thing for the United States to purchase large expanses of western territory but quite another for it to govern them effectively.
Jefferson was triumphantly reelected in 1804, with 162 electoral votes to only 14 votes for his Federalist opponent.
But the laurels of Jeffersons first administration soon withered under the blasts of the new storm that broke in Europe.
After unloading Louisiana in 1803, Napoleon deliberately provoked a renewal of his war with Britainan awesome conflict that raged on for eleven long years.
For two years a maritime United Statesthe number one neutral carrier since 1793enjoyed juicy commercial pickings.
But a setback came in 1805.
At the Battle of Trafalgar, one-eyed Horatio Lord Nelson achieved immortality by smashing the combined French and Spanish fleets off the coast of Spain, thereby ensuring Britains supremacy on the seas.
At the Battle of Austerlitz in Austriathe Battle of the Three EmperorsNapoleon crushed the combined Austrian and Russian armies, thereby ensuring his mastery of the land.
Like the tiger and the shark, France and Britain now reigned supreme in their chosen elements.
Unable to hurt each other directly, the two antagonists were forced to strike indirect blows.
Britain ruled the waves and waived the rules.
The London government, beginning in 1806, issued a series of Orders in Council.
These edicts closed the European ports under French control to foreign shipping, including American, unless the vessels first stopped at a British port.
Napoleon struck back, ordering the seizure of all merchant ships, including American, that entered British ports.
There was no way to trade with either nation without facing the others guns.
American vessels were, quite literally, caught between the Devil and the deep blue sea.
Even more galling to American pride than the seizure of wooden ships was the seizure of fleshand-blood American seamen.
Impressmentthe forcible enlistment of sailorswas a crude form of conscription that the British, among others, had employed for over four centuries.
Clubs and stretchers (for men knocked unconscious) were standard equipment of press gangs from His Majestys manhungry ships.
Some six thousand bona fide U.S.
citizens were impressed by the piratical man-stealers of Britain from 1808 to 1811 alone.
A number of these luckless souls died or were killed in His Majestys service, leaving their kinfolk and friends bereaved and embittered.
Britains determination was spectacularly highlighted in 1807.
A royal frigate overhauled a U.S.
frigate, the  of Virginia.
The British captain bluntly demanded the surrender of four alleged deserters.
London  had never claimed the right to seize sailors from a foreign warship, and the American commander, though totally unprepared to fight, refused the request.
The British warship thereupon fired three devastating broadsides at close range, killing three Americans and wounding eighteen.
Four deserters were dragged away, and the bloody hulk called the Britain was clearly in the wrong, as the London Foreign Office admitted.
But Londons contrition availed little; a roar of national wrath went up from infuriated Americans.
Jefferson, the peace lover, could easily have had war if he had wanted it.
National honor would not permit a slavish submission to British and French mistreatment.
Yet a largescale foreign war was contrary to the settled policy of the new Republicand in addition it would be futile.
The navy was weak, thanks largely to Jeffersons antinavalism; and the army was even weaker.
A disastrous defeat would not improve Americas plight.
The warring nations in Europe depended heavily upon the United States for raw materials and foodstuffs.
In his eager search for an alternative to war, Jefferson seized upon this essential fact.
He reasoned that if America voluntarily cut off its exports, the offending powers would be forced to bow, hat in hand, and agree to respect its rights.
Responding to the presidential lash, Congress hastily passed the Embargo Act late in 1807.
This rigorous law forbade the export of all goods from the United States, whether in American or in foreign ships.
More than just a compromise between submission and shooting, the embargo embodied Jeffersons idea of peaceful coercion.
If it worked, the embargo would vindicate the rights of neutral nations and point to a new way of conducting foreign affairs.
If it failed, Jefferson feared the Republic would perish, subjugated to the European powers or sucked into their ferocious war.
The American economy staggered under the effect of the embargo long before Britain or France began to bend.
Forests of dead masts gradually filled New Englands once-bustling harbors; docks that had once rumbled were deserted (except for illegal trade); and soup kitchens cared for some of the hungry unemployed.
Jeffersonian Republicans probably hurt the commerce of New England, which they avowedly were trying to protect, far more than Britain and France together were doing.
Farmers of the South and West, the strongholds of Jefferson, suffered no less disastrously than New England.
They were alarmed by the mounting piles of unexportable cotton, grain, and tobacco.
Jefferson seemed to be waging war on his fellow citizens rather than on the offending foreign powers.
An enormous illicit trade mushroomed in 1808, especially along the Canadian border, where bands of armed Americans on loaded rafts overawed or overpowered federal agents.
Irate citizens cynically transposed the letters of Embargo to read O Grab Me, Go Bar Em, and Mobrage, while heartily cursing the Dambargo.
Jefferson nonetheless induced Congress to pass iron-toothed enforcing legislation.
It was so inquisitorial and tyrannical as to cause some Americans to think more kindly of George III, whom Jefferson had berated in the Declaration of Independence.
One indignant New Hampshirite denounced the president with this ditty: The embargo even had the effect of reviving the moribund Federalist party.
Gaining new converts, C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 its leaders hurled their nullification of the embargo into the teeth of the Virginia lordlings in Washington.
In 1804 the discredited Federalists had polled only 14 electoral votes out of 176; in 1808, the embargo year, the figure rose to 47 out of 175.
New England seethed with talk of secession, and Jefferson later admitted that he felt the foundations of government tremble under his feet.
An alarmed Congress, yielding to the storm of public anger, finally repealed the embargo on March 1, 1809, three days before Jeffersons retirement.
A half-loaf substitute was provided by the NonIntercourse Act.
This measure formally reopened trade with all the nations of the world, except the two most important, Britain and France.
Though thus watered down, economic coercion continued to be the policy of the Jeffersonians from 1809 to 1812, when the nation finally plunged into war.
Why did the embargo, Jeffersons most daring act of statesmanship, collapse after fifteen dismal months?
First of all, he underestimated the bulldog determination of the British, as others have, and overestimated the dependence of both belligerents on Americas trade.
Bumper grain crops blessed the British Isles during these years, and the revolutionary Latin American republics unexpectedly threw open their ports for compensating commerce.
With most of Europe under his control, Napoleon could afford to tighten his belt and go without American trade.
The French continued to seize American ships and steal their cargoes, while their emperor mocked the United States by claiming that he was simply helping them enforce the embargo.
More critically, perhaps, Jefferson miscalculated the unpopularity of such a self-crucifying weapon and the difficulty of enforcing it.
The hated embargo was not continued long enough or tightly enough to achieve the desired resultsand a leaky embargo was perhaps more costly than none at all.
Curiously enough, New England plucked a new prosperity from the ugly jaws of the embargo.
With shipping tied up and imported goods scarce, the resourceful Yankees reopened old factories and erected new ones.
The real foundations of modern Americas industrial might were laid behind the protective wall of the embargo, followed by nonintercourse and the War of 1812.
Jefferson, the avowed critic of factories, may have unwittingly done more for American manufacturing than Alexander Hamilton, industrys outspoken friend.
Following Washingtons precedent, Jefferson left the presidency after two terms, happy to escape what he called the splendid misery of the highest office in the land.
He strongly favored the nomination and election of a kindred spirit as his successorhis friend and fellow Virginian, the quiet, intellectual, and unassuming James Madison.
Madison took the presidential oath on March 4, 1809, as the awesome conflict in Europe was roaring to its climax.
The scholarly Madison was small of stature, light of weight, bald of head, and weak of voice.
Despite a distinguished career as a legislator, he was crippled as president by factions within his party and his cabinet.
Unable to dominate Congress as Jefferson had done, Madison often found himself holding the bag for risky foreign policies not of his own making.
The Non-Intercourse Act of 1809a watereddown version of Jeffersons embargo aimed solely  at Britain and Francewas due to expire in 1810.
To Madisons dismay, Congress dismantled the embargo completely with a bargaining measure known as Macons Bill No.
While reopening American trade with all the world, Macons Bill dangled what Congress hoped was an attractive lure.
If either Britain or France repealed its commercial restrictions, America would restore its embargo against the nonrepealing nation.
To Madison the bill was a shameful capitulation.
It practically admitted that the United States could not survive without one of the belligerents as a commercial ally, but it left determination of who that ally would be to the potentates of London and Paris.
The crafty Napoleon saw his chance.
Since 1806 Britain had justified its Orders in Council as retaliation for Napoleons actionsimplying, without promising outright, that trade restrictions would be lifted if the French decrees disappeared.
Now the French held out the same half-promise.
In August 1810 word came from Napoleons foreign minister that the French decrees might be repealed if Britain also lifted its Orders in Council.
The ministers message was deliberately ambiguous.
Napoleon had no intention of permitting unrestricted trade between America and Britain.
Rather, he hoped to maneuver the United States into resuming its embargo against the British, thus creating a partial blockade against his enemy that he would not have to raise a finger to enforce.
Madison knew better than to trust Napoleon, but he gambled that the threat of seeing the United States trade exclusively with France would lead the British to repeal their restrictionsand vice versa.
C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Let every man who holds the name of America dear to him, stretch forth his hands and put this accursed thing, this  from him.
Be resolute, act like sons of liberty, of God, and your country; nerve your arm with vengeance against the Despot [Jefferson] who would wrest the inestimable germ of your Independence from youand you shall be  Thomas Jefferson still survives.
Closing his eyes to the emperors obvious subterfuge, he accepted the French offer as evidence of repeal.
The terms of Macons Bill gave the British three months to live up to their implied promise by revoking the Orders in Council and reopening the Atlantic to neutral trade.
They did not.
In firm control of the seas, London saw little need to bargain.
As long as the war with Napoleon went on, they decided, America could trade exclusively with the British Empireor with nobody at all.
Madisons gamble failed.
The president saw no choice but to reestablish the embargo against Britain alonea decision that he knew meant the end of American neutrality and that he feared was the final step toward war.
Not all of Madisons party was reluctant to fight.
The complexion of the Twelfth Congress, which met late in 1811, differed markedly from that of its predecessor.
Recent elections had swept away many of the older submission men and replaced them with young hotheads, many from the South and West.
Dubbed war hawks by their Federalist opponents, the newcomers were indeed on fire for a new war with the old enemy.
The war hawks were weary of hearing how their fathers had whipped the British single-handedly, and they detested the manhandling of American sailors and the British Orders in Council that dammed the flow of American trade, especially western farm products headed for Europe.
Western war hawks also yearned to wipe out a renewed Indian threat to the pioneer settlers who were streaming into the trans-Allegheny wilderness.
As this white flood washed through the green forests, more and more Indians were pushed toward the setting sun.
The injuries received from France do not lessen the enormity of those heaped upon us by  we had an unquestionable right to select our enemy.
We have given the preference to flagrant wrongs.
I prefer the troubled sea of war, demanded by the honor and independence of this country, with all its calamities and desolation, to the tranquil and putrescent pool of ignominious peace.
Two remarkable Shawnee brothers, Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa, known to non-Indians as the Prophet, concluded that the time had come to stem this onrushing tide.
They began to weld together a far-flung confederacy of all the tribes east of the Mississippi, inspiring a vibrant movement of Indian unity and cultural renewal.
Their followers gave up textile clothing for traditional buckskin garments.
Their warriors forswore alcohol, the better to fight a last-ditch battle with the paleface invaders.
Rejecting whites concept of ownership, Tecumseh urged his supporters never to cede land to whites unless all Indians agreed.
While frontiersmen and their war-hawk spokesmen in Congress were convinced that British scalp buyers in Canada were nourishing the Indians growing strength.
In the fall of 1811, William Henry Harrison, governor of Indiana Territory, gathered an army and advanced on Tecumsehs headquarters at the junction of the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers in present-day Indiana.
Tecumseh was absent, recruiting supporters in the South, but the Prophet attacked Harrisons armyfoolishly, in Tecumsehs eyeswith a small force of Shawnees.
The Shawnees were routed and their settlement burned.
The Battle of Tippecanoe made Harrison a national hero.
It also discredited the Prophet and drove Tecumseh into an alliance with the British.
When Americas war with Britain came, Tecumseh fought fiercely for the redcoats until his death in 1813 at the Battle of the Thames.
With him perished the dream of an Indian confederacy.
By the spring of 1812, Madison believed war with Britain to be inevitable.
The British arming of hostile Indians pushed him toward this decision, as did the whoops of the war hawks in his own party.
People like Representative Felix Grundy of Tennessee, three of whose brothers had been killed in clashes with Indians, cried that there was only one way to remove the menace of the Indians: wipe out their Canadian base.
On to Canada, on to Canada, was C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Sell a country!
Why not sell the air, the clouds, and the great sea, as well as the earth?
Did not the Great Spirit make them all for the use of his children?
one of those uncommon geniuses who spring up occasionally to produce revolutions and overturn the established order of things.
If it were not for the vicinity of the United States, he would perhaps be founder of an Empire that would rival in glory that of Mexico or Peru.
the war hawks chant.
Southern expansionists, less vocal, cast a covetous eye on Florida, then weakly held by Britains ally Spain.
Above all, Madison turned to war to restore confidence in the republican experiment.
For five years the Republicans had tried to steer between the warring European powers, to set a course between submission and battle.
Theirs had been a noble vision, but it had brought them only international derision and internal strife.
Madison and the Republicans came to believe that only a vigorous assertion of American rights could demonstrate the viability of American nationhoodand of democracy as a form of government.
If America could not fight to protect itself, its experiment in republicanism would be discredited in the eyes of a scoffing world.
Madison asked Congress to declare war on June 1, 1812.
Congress obliged him two weeks later.
The vote in the House was 79 to 49 for war, in the Senate 19 to 13.
The close tally revealed deep divisions over the wisdom of fighting.
The split was both sectional and partisan.
Support for war came from the South and West, but also from Republicans in populous middle states such as Pennsylvania and Virginia.
Federalists in both North and South damned the conflict, but their stronghold was New England, which greeted the declaration of war with muffled bells, flags at half-mast, and public fasting.
Why should seafaring New England oppose the war for a free sea?
The answer is that pro-British Federalists in the Northeast sympathized with Britain and resented the Republicans sympathy with Napoleon, whom they regarded as the Corsican butcher and the anti-Christ of the age.
The Federalists also opposed the acquisition of Canada, which would merely add more agrarian states from the wild Northwest.
This, in turn, would increase the voting strength of the Jeffersonian Republicans.
The bitterness of New England Federalists against Mr.
Madisons War led them to treason or near-treason.
They were determined, wrote one Republican versifier, New England gold holders probably lent more dollars to the British Exchequer than to the federal Treasury.
Federalist farmers sent huge quantities of supplies and foodstuffs to Canada, enabling British armies to invade New York.
New England governors stubbornly refused to permit their militia to serve outside their own states.
In a sense America had to fight two enemies simultaneously: Old England and New England.
Thus perilously divided, the barely United States plunged into armed conflict against Britain, then the worlds most powerful empire.
No sober American could have much reasonable hope of victory, but by 1812 the Jeffersonian Republicans saw no other choice.
C HAPTER 11 The Triumphs and Travails of the Jeffersonian Republic, 18001812 Jefferson defeats Adams for presidency Judiciary Act of 1801 Naval war with Tripoli Revised naturalization law Judiciary Act of 1801 repealed Louisiana Purchase Jefferson reelected president Impeachment of Justice Chase Lewis and Clark expedition Peace treaty with Tripoli Pikes explorations Burr treason trial Embargo Act Madison elected president  Non-Intercourse Act replaces Embargo Act Macons Bill No.
2 Napoleon announces (falsely) repeal of blockade decrees Madison reestablishes nonimportation against Britain Battle of Tippecanoe United States declares war on Britain For further reading, see page A7 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism  18121824 P RESIDENT J AMES M ONROE , D ECEMBER 2, 1823 T he War of 1812, largely because of widespread disunity, ranks as one of Americas worst-fought wars.
There was no burning national anger, as there had been in 1807 following the  The supreme lesson of the conflict was the folly of leading a divided and apathetic people into war.
And yet, despite the unimpressive military outcome and even less decisive negotiated peace, Americans came out of the war with a renewed sense of nationhood.
For the next dozen years, an awakened spirit of nationalism would inspire activities ranging from protecting manufacturing to building roads to defending the authority of the federal government over the states.
On the eve of the War of 1812, the regular army was ill-trained, ill-disciplined, and widely scattered.
It had to be supplemented by the even more poorly trained militia, who were sometimes distinguished by their speed of foot in leaving the battlefield.
Some of the ranking generals were semisenile heirlooms from the Revolutionary War, rusting on their laurels and lacking in vigor and vision.
The offensive strategy against Canada was especially poorly conceived.
Had the Americans captured Montreal, the center of population and transportation, everything to the west might have died, just as the leaves of a tree wither when the trunk is girdled.
But instead of laying ax to the trunk, the Americans frittered away their strength in the three-pronged invasion of 1812.
The trio of invading forces that set out from Detroit, Niagara, and Lake Champlain were all beaten back shortly after they had crossed the Canadian border.
By contrast, the British and Canadians displayed energy from the outset.
Early in the war, they captured the American fort of Michilimackinac, which commanded the upper Great Lakes and the Indian-inhabited area to the south and west.
Their brilliant defensive operations were led by the inspired British general Isaac Brock and assisted (in the American camp) by General Mud and General Confusion.
When several American land invasions of Canada were again hurled back in 1813, Americans looked for success on water.
Man for man and ship for ship, the American navy did much better than the army.
In comparison to British ships, American craft on the whole were more skillfully handled, had better gunners, and were manned by non-pressgang crews who were burning to avenge numerous indignities.
Similarly, the American frigates, notably the  heavier firepower, and larger crews, of which one sailor in six was a free black.
Control of the Great Lakes was vital, and an energetic American naval officer, Oliver Hazard Perry, managed to build a fleet of green-timbered ships on the shores of Lake Erie, manned by even greener seamen.
When he captured a British fleet in a furious engagement on the lake, he reported to his superior, We have met the enemy and they are ours.
Perrys victory and his slogan infused new life into the drooping American cause.
Forced to withdraw from Detroit and Fort Malden, the retreating redcoats were overtaken by General Harrisons army and beaten at the Battle of the Thames in October 1813.
Despite these successes, the Americans by late 1814, far from invading Canada, were grimly defending their own soil against the invading British.
In Europe the diversionary power of Napoleon was destroyed in mid-1814, and the dangerous despot was exiled to the Mediterranean isle of Elba.
The United States, which had so brashly provoked war behind the protective skirts of Napoleon, was now left to face the music alone.
Thousands of victorious veteran redcoats began to pour into Canada from the Continent.
Assembling some ten thousand crack troops, the British prepared in 1814 for a crushing blow into New York along the familiar lake-river route.
In the absence of roads, the invader was forced to bring supplies over the Lake Champlain waterway.
A weaker American fleet, commanded by the thirtyyear-old Thomas Macdonough, challenged the British.
The ensuing battle was desperately fought near Plattsburgh on September 11, 1814, on floating slaughterhouses.
The American flagship at one C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 Montreal Albany Fort Niagara Fort Michilimackinac    (Captured by British, 1812) Detroit B R I T I S H C A N A D A U.S.
invasions Montreal Albany Fort Niagara York (Toronto) Detroit Fort Maiden B R I T I S H C A N A D A United States force repulsed United States force repulsed Perry's route Harrison's route U.S.
invasions The Three U.S.
Invasions of 1812 Campaigns of 1813 point was in grave trouble.
But Macdonough, unexpectedly turning his ship about with cables, confronted the enemy with a fresh broadside and snatched victory from the fangs of defeat.
The results of this heroic naval battle were momentous.
The invading British army was forced to retreat.
Macdonough thus saved at least upper New York from conquest, New England from further disaffection, and the Union from possible dissolution.
He also profoundly affected the concurrent negotiations of the Anglo-American peace treaty in Europe.
A second formidable British force, numbering about four thousand, landed in the Chesapeake Bay area in August 1814.
Advancing rapidly on Washington, it easily dispersed some six thousand panicky militia at Bladensburg (the Bladensburg races).
The invaders then entered the capital and set fire to most of the public buildings, including the Capitol and the White House.
But while Washington burned, the Americans at Baltimore held firm.
The British fleet hammered Fort McHenry with their cannon but could not capture the city.
Francis Scott Key, a detained American anxiously watching the bombardment from a British ship, was inspired by the doughty defenders to write the words of The StarSpangled Banner.
Set to the tune of a saucy English tavern refrain, the song quickly attained popularity.
The free men of colour in [your] city are inured to the Southern climate and would make excellent Soldiers.
They must be for or against usdistrust them, and you make them your enemies, place confidence in them, and you engage them by every dear and honorable tie to the interest of the country, who extends to them equal rights and [privileges] with white men.
A third British blow of 1814, aimed at New Orleans, menaced the entire Mississippi Valley.
Gaunt and hawk-faced Andrew Jackson, fresh from crushing the southwest Indians at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, was placed in command (see map, p.
252).
His hodgepodge force consisted of seven thousand sailors, regulars, pirates, and Frenchmen, as well as militiamen from Louisiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
Among the defenders were two Louisiana regiments of free black volunteers, numbering about four hundred men.
The Americans threw up their entrenchment, and in the words of a popular song, The overconfident British, numbering some eight thousand battle-seasoned veterans, blundered badly.
They made the mistake of launching a frontal assault, on January 8, 1815, on the entrenched American riflemen and cannoneers.
The attackers suffered the most devastating defeat of the entire war, losing over two thousand, killed and wounded, C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 in half an hour, as compared with some seventy for the Americans.
It was an astonishing victory for Jackson and his men.
News of the victory struck the country like a clap of thunder, according to one contemporary.
Andrew Jackson became a national hero as poets and politicians lined up to sing the praises of the defenders of New Orleans.
It hardly mattered when word arrived that a peace treaty had been signed at Ghent, Belgium, ending the war two weeks before the battle.
The United States had fought for honor  as much as material gain.
The Battle of New  Orleans restored that honor, at least in American eyes, and unleashed a wave of nationalism and  self-confidence.
Its wrath aroused, the Royal Navy had finally retaliated by throwing a ruinous naval blockade along Americas coast and by landing raiding parties almost at will.
American economic life, including fishing, was crippled.
Customs revenues were choked off, and near the end of the war, the bankrupt Treasury was unable to meet its maturing obligations.
Tsar Alexander I of Russia, feeling hard-pressed by Napoleons army and not wanting his British ally to fritter away its strength in America, proposed mediation between the clashing Anglo-Saxon cousins in 1812.
The tsars feeler eventually set in motion the machinery that brought five American peacemakers to the quaint Belgian city of Ghent in 1814.
The bickering group was headed by early-rising, puritanical John Quincy Adams, son of John Adams, who deplored the late-hour card playing of his highliving colleague Henry Clay.
Confident after their military successes, the British envoys made sweeping demands for a  neutralized Indian buffer state in the Great Lakes region, control of the Great Lakes, and a substantial part of conquered Maine.
The Americans flatly rejected these terms, and the talks appeared stalemated.
But news of British reverses in upper New York and at Baltimore, and increasing war-weariness in Britain, made London more willing to compromise.
Preoccupied with redrafting Napoleons map of Europe at the Congress of Vienna and eyeing still-dangerous France, the British lion resigned itself to licking its wounds.
The Treaty of Ghent, signed on Christmas Eve in 1814, was essentially an armistice.
Both sides simply The peoplenaturally vain, boastful, and insolenthave been filled with an absolute contempt for our maritime power, and a furious eagerness to beat down our maritime pretensions.
Those passions, which have been inflamed by success, could only have been cooled by what in vulgar and emphatic language has been termed a sound flogging.
Presidential Election of 1812 (with electoral vote by state) The Federalists showed impressive strength in the North, and their presidential candidate, DeWitt Clinton, the future Father of the Erie Canal, almost won.
If the 25 electoral votes of Pennsylvania had gone to the New Yorker, he would have won, 114 to 103.
MISSOURI TERRITORY SPANISH  FLORIDA MISSISSIPPI TERRITORY GEORGIA 8 S.C.
11 N.C.
15 TENN.
8 KY.
12 VIRGINIA 25 MD.
11 DEL.
4 N.J.
8 PA.
25 N.Y.
29 CONN.
9 R.I.
4 MASS.
22 VT.
8 N.H.
8 OHIO 7 IND.
ILLINOIS TERR.
3 MICH.
TERR.
Madison:  Democratic Republican Clinton: Federalist Divided agreed to stop fighting and to restore conquered territory.
No mention was made of those grievances for which America had ostensibly fought: the Indian menace, search and seizure, Orders in Council, impressment, and confiscations.
These discreet omissions have often been cited as further evidence of the insincerity of the war hawks.
Rather, they are proof that the Americans had not managed to defeat the British.
With neither side able to impose its will, the treaty negotiationslike the war itself ended as a virtual draw.
Relieved Americans boasted Not One Inch of Territory Ceded or Losta phrase that contrasted strangely with the On to Canada rallying cry of the wars outset.
Defiant New England remained a problem.
It prospered during the conflict, owing largely to illicit trade with the enemy in Canada and to the absence of a British blockade until 1814.
But the embittered opposition of the Federalists to the war continued unabated.
As the war dragged on, New England extremists became more vocal.
A small minority of them proposed secession from the Union, or at least a separate peace with Britain.
Ugly rumors were afloat C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 about Blue Light Federaliststreacherous New Englanders who supposedly flashed lanterns on the shore so that blockading British cruisers would be alerted to the attempted escape of American ships.
The most spectacular manifestation of Federalist discontent was the ill-omened Hartford Convention.
Late in 1814, when the capture of New Orleans seemed imminent, Massachusetts issued a call for a convention at Hartford, Connecticut.
The states of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island dispatched full delegations; neighboring New Hampshire and Vermont sent partial representation.
This group of prominent men, twenty-six in all, met in complete secrecy for about three weeksDecember 15, 1814, to January 5, 1815to discuss their grievances and to seek redress for their wrongs.
In truth, the Hartford Convention was actually less radical than the alarmists supposed.
Though  a minority of delegates gave vent to wild talk of secession, the conventions final report was quite moderate.
It demanded, financial assistance from Washington to compensate for lost trade and proposed constitutional amendments requiring a twothirds vote in Congress before an embargo could be imposed, new states admitted, or war declared.
Most of the demands reflected Federalist fears that a once-proud New England was falling subservient to an agrarian South and West.
Delegates sought to abolish the three-fifths clause in the Constitution (which allowed the South to count a portion of its slaves in calculating proportional representation), to limit presidents to a single term, and to prohibit the election of two successive presidents from the same state.
This last clause was aimed at the muchresented Virginia Dynastyby 1814 a Virginian had been president for all but four years in the Republics quarter-century of life.
Three special envoys from Massachusetts carried these demands to the burned-out capital of Washington.
The trio arrived just in time to be overwhelmed by the glorious news from New Orleans, followed by that from Ghent.
As the rest of the nation congratulated itself on a glorious victory, New Englands wartime complaints seemed petty at best and treasonous at worst.
Pursued by the sneers and jeers of the press, the envoys sank away in disgrace and into obscurity.
The Hartford resolutions, as it turned out, were the death dirge of the Federalist party.
In 1816 the Federalists nominated their last presidential candidate.
He was handily trounced by James Monroe, yet another Virginian.
Federalist doctrines of disunity, which long survived the party, blazed a fateful trail.
Until 1815 there was far more talk of nullification and secession in New England than in any other section, including the South.
The outright flouting of the Jeffersonian embargo and the later crippling of the war effort were the two most damaging acts of nullification in America prior to the events leading to the Civil War.
The War of 1812 was a small war, involving about 6,000 Americans killed or wounded.
It was but a footnote to the mighty European conflagration.
In 1812, when Napoleon invaded Russia with about 500,000 men, Madison tried to invade Canada with about 5,000 men.
But if the American conflict was globally unimportant, it had huge consequences for the United States.
The Republic had shown that it would resist, sword in hand, what it regarded as grievous wrongs.
Other nations developed a new respect for Americas fighting prowess.
Naval officers like Perry and Macdonough were the most effective type of negotiators; the hot breath of their broadsides spoke  the most eloquent diplomatic language.
Americas emissaries abroad were henceforth treated with less I dont like Americans; I never did, and never shall like them.
I have no wish to eat with them, drink with them, deal with, or consort with them in any way; but let me tell the whole truth,  for the laurels to be acquired, by overcoming an enemy so brave, determined, and alert, and in every way so worthy of ones steel,  as they have always proved.
scorn.
In a diplomatic sense, if not in a military sense, the conflict could be called the Second War for American Independence.
A new nation, moreover, was welded in the fiery furnace of armed conflict.
Sectionalism, now identified with discredited New England Federalists, was dealt a black eye.
The painful events of the war glaringly revealed, as perhaps nothing else could have done, the folly of sectional disunity.
In a sense the most conspicuous casualty of the war was the  Federalist party.
War heroes emerged, especially the two Indianfighters Andrew Jackson and William Henry Harrison.
Both of them were to become president.
Left in the lurch by their British friends at Ghent, the Indians were forced to make such terms as they could.
They reluctantly consented, in a series of treaties, to relinquish vast areas of forested land north of the Ohio River.
Manufacturing prospered behind the fiery wooden wall of the British blockade.
In an economic sense, as well as in a diplomatic sense, the War of 1812 may be regarded as the Second War for American Independence.
The industries that were thus stimulated by the fighting rendered America less dependent on Europes workshops.
Canadian patriotism and nationalism also received a powerful stimulus from the clash.
Many Canadians felt betrayed by the Treaty of Ghent.
They were especially aggrieved by the failure to secure an Indian buffer state or even mastery of the Great Lakes.
Canadians fully expected the frustrated Yankees to return, and for a time the Americans and British engaged in a floating arms race on the Great Lakes.
But in 1817 the Rush-Bagot agreement between Britain and the United States severely limited naval armament on the lakes.
Better relations brought the last border fortifications down in the 1870s, with the happy result that the United States and Canada came to share the worlds longest unfortified boundary5,527 miles long.
After Napoleons final defeat at Waterloo in 1815, Europe slumped into a peace of exhaustion.
Deposed monarchs returned to battered thrones, as the Old World took the rutted road back to conservatism, illiberalism, and reaction.
But the American people were largely unaffected by these European developments.
Turning their backs on the Old World, they faced resolutely toward the untamed Westand toward the task of building their  democracy.
The most impressive by-product of the War of 1812 was a heightened nationalismthe spirit of nationconsciousness or national oneness.
America may not have fought the war as one nation, but it emerged as one nation.
The changed mood even manifested itself in the birth of a distinctively national literature.
Washington Irving and James Fenimore Cooper attained international recognition in the 1820s, significantly as the nations first writers of importance to use American scenes and themes.
School textbooks, often British in an earlier era, were now being written by Americans for Americans.
In the world of magazines, the highly intellectual  triumph at New Orleans.
Even American painters increasingly celebrated their native landscapes on their canvases.
A fresh nationalistic spirit could be recognized in many other areas as well.
The rising tide of nation-consciousness even touched finance.
A revived Bank of the United States was voted by Congress in 1816.
A more handsome national capital began to rise from the ashes of Washington.
The army was expanded to ten thousand men.
The navy further covered itself with glory in 1815 when it administered a thorough beating to the piratical plunderers of North Africa.
Stephen Decatur, naval hero of the War of 1812 and of the Barbary Coast expeditions, pungently captured the countrys nationalist mood in a famous toast made on his return from the Mediterranean campaigns: Our country!
In her intercourse with foreign nations may she always be in the right; but our country, right or wrong!
Nationalism likewise manifested itself in manufacturing.
Patriotic Americans took pride in the factories that had recently mushroomed forth, largely as a result of the self-imposed embargoes and the war.
When hostilities ended in 1815, British competitors undertook to recover lost ground.
They began to dump the contents of their bulging warehouses on the United States, often cutting their C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 prices below cost in an effort to strangle the American war-baby factories in the cradle.
The infant industries bawled lustily for protection.
To many red-blooded Americans, it seemed as though the British, having failed to crush Yankee fighters on the battlefield, were now seeking to crush Yankee factories in the marketplace.
A nationalist Congress, out-Federalizing the old Federalists, responded by passing the path-breaking Tariff of 1816the first tariff in American history instituted primarily for protection, not revenue.
Its ratesroughly 20 to 25 percent on the value of dutiable importswere not high enough to provide completely adequate safeguards, but the law was a bold beginning.
A strongly protective trend was started that stimulated the appetites of the protected for more protection.
Nationalism was further highlighted by a grandiose plan of Henry Clay for developing a profitable home market.
Still radiating the nationalism of war-hawk days, he threw himself behind an elaborate scheme known by 1824 as the American System.
This system had three main parts.
It began with a strong banking system, which would provide easy and abundant credit.
Clay also advocated a protective tariff, behind which eastern manufacturing would flourish.
Revenues gushing from the tariff would provide funds for the third component of the American systema network of roads and canals, especially in the burgeoning Ohio Valley.
Through these new arteries of transportation would flow foodstuffs and raw materials from the South and West to the North and East.
In exchange, a stream of manufactured goods would flow in the return direction, knitting the country together economically and politically.
Persistent and eloquent demands by Henry Clay and others for better transportation struck a responsive chord with the public.
The recent attempts to invade Canada had all failed partly because of oath-provoking roadsor no roads at all.
People who have dug wagons out of hub-deep mud do not quickly forget their blisters and backaches.
An outcry for better transportation, rising most noisily in the road-poor West, was one of the most striking aspects of the nationalism inspired by the War of 1812.
But attempts to secure federal funding for roads and canals stumbled on Republican constitutional scruples.
Congress voted in 1817 to distribute $1.5 million to the states for internal improvements.
But President Madison sternly vetoed this handout measure as unconstitutional.
The individual states were thus forced to venture ahead with construction programs of their own, including the Erie Canal, triumphantly completed by New York in 1825.
Jeffersonian Republicans, who had gulped down Hamiltonian loose constructionism on other important problems, choked on the idea of direct federal support of intrastate internal improvements.
New England, in particular, strongly opposed federally constructed roads and canals, because such outlets would further drain away population and create competing states beyond the mountains.
James Monroesix feet tall, somewhat stooped, courtly, and mild-manneredwas nominated for the presidency in 1816 by the Republicans.
They thus undertook to continue the so-called Virginia dynasty of Washington, Jefferson, and Madison.
The C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 fading Federalists ran a candidate for the last time in their checkered history, and he was crushed by 183 electoral votes to 34.
The vanquished Federalist party was gasping its dying breaths, leaving the field to the triumphant Republicans and one-party rule.
In James Monroe, the man and the times auspiciously met.
As the last president to wear an old-style cocked hat, he straddled two generations: the bygone age of the Founding Fathers and the emergent age of nationalism.
Never brilliant, and perhaps not great, the serene Virginian with gray-blue eyes was in intellect and personal force the least distinguished of the first eight presidents.
But the times called for sober administration, not dashing heroics.
And Monroe was an experienced, levelheaded executive, with an ear-to-the-ground talent for interpreting popular rumblings.
Emerging nationalism was further cemented by a goodwill tour Monroe undertook early in 1817, ostensibly to inspect military defenses.
He pushed northward deep into New England and then westward to Detroit, viewing en route Niagara Falls.
Even in Federalist New England, the enemys country, he received a heartwarming welcome; a Boston newspaper was so far carried away as to announce that an Era of Good Feelings had been ushered in.
This happy phrase has been commonly used since then to describe the administrations of Monroe.
The Era of Good Feelings, unfortunately, was something of a misnomer.
Considerable tranquility and prosperity did in fact smile upon the early years of Monroe, but the period was a troubled one.
The acute issues of the tariff, the bank, internal improvements, and the sale of public lands were being hotly contested.
Sectionalism was crystallizing, and the conflict over slavery was beginning to raise its hideous head.
Much of the goodness went out of the good  feelings in 1819, when a paralyzing economic  panic descended.
It brought deflation, depression, bankruptcies, bank failures, unemployment, soup kitchens, and overcrowded pesthouses known as debtors prisons.
This was the first national financial panic since President Washington took office.
Many factors contributed to the catastrophe of 1819, but looming large was overspeculation in frontier lands.
The Bank of the United States, through its western branches, had become deeply involved in this popular type of outdoor gambling.
Financial paralysis from the panic, which lasted in some degree for several years, gave a rude setback to the nationalistic ardor.
The West was especially hard hit.
When the pinch came, the Bank of the United States forced the speculative (wildcat) western banks to the wall and foreclosed mortgages on countless farms.
All this was technically legal but politically unwise.
In the eyes of the western debtor, the nationalist Bank of the United States soon became a kind of financial devil.
The panic of 1819 also created backwashes in the political and social world.
The poorer classes the one-suspender men and their familieswere severely strapped, and in their troubles was sown the seed of Jacksonian democracy.
Hard times also directed attention to the inhumanity of imprisoning debtors.
In extreme cases, often overplayed, mothers were torn from their infants for owing a few dollars.
Mounting agitation against imprisonment for debt bore fruit in remedial legislation in an increasing number of states.
The onward march of the West continued; nine frontier states had joined the original thirteen between 1791 and 1819.
With an eye to preserving the NorthNever before, perhaps, since the institution of civil government, did the same harmony, the same absence of party spirit, the same national feeling, pervade a community.
The result is too consoling to dispute too nicely about the cause.
South sectional balance, most of these commonwealths had been admitted alternately, free or slave.
(See Admission of States in the Appendix.
) Why this explosive expansion?
In part it was simply a continuation of the generations-old westward movement, which had been going on since early colonial days.
In addition, the siren song of cheap landthe Ohio feverhad a special appeal to European immigrants.
Eager newcomers from abroad were beginning to stream down the gangplanks in impressive numbers, especially after the war of boycotts and bullets.
Land exhaustion in the older tobacco states, where the soil was mined rather than cultivated, likewise drove people westward.
Glib speculators accepted small down payments, making it easier to buy new holdings.
The western boom was stimulated by additional developments.
Acute economic distress during the embargo years turned many pinched faces toward the setting sun.
The crushing of the Indians in the Northwest and South by Generals Harrison and Jackson pacified the frontier and opened up vast virgin tracts of land.
The building of highways improved the land routes to the Ohio Valley.
Noteworthy was the Cumberland Road, begun in 1811, which ran ultimately from western Maryland to Illinois.
The use of the first steamboat on western waters, also in 1811, heralded a new era of upstream navigation.
But the West, despite the inflow of settlers, was still weak in population and influence.
Not potent enough politically to make its voice heard, it was forced to ally itself with other sections.
Thus strengthened, it demanded cheap acreage and partially achieved its goal in the Land Act of 1820, which authorized a buyer to purchase 80 virgin acres at a minimum of $1.25 an acre in cash.
The West also demanded cheap transportation and slowly got it, despite the constitutional qualms of the presidents and the hostility of easterners.
Finally, the West demanded cheap money, issued by its own wildcat banks, and fought the powerful Bank of the United States to attain its goal (see Makers of America: Settlers of the Old Northwest, pp.
248249).
Sectional tensions, involving rivalry between the slave South and the free North over control of the virgin West, were stunningly revealed in 1819.
In that year the territory of Missouri knocked on the C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 doors of Congress for admission as a slave state.
This fertile and well-watered area contained sufficient population to warrant statehood.
But the House of Representatives stymied the plans of the Missourians by passing the incendiary Tallmadge amendment.
It stipulated that no more slaves should be brought into Missouri and also provided for the gradual emancipation of children born to slave parents already there.
A roar of anger burst from slave-holding southerners.
They were joined by many depression-cursed pioneers who favored unhampered expansion of the West and by many northerners, especially diehard Federalists, who were eager to use the issue to break the back of the Virginia dynasty.
Southerners saw in the Tallmadge amendment, which they eventually managed to defeat in the Senate, an ominous threat to sectional balance.
When the Constitution was adopted in 1788, the North and South were running neck and neck in wealth and population.
But with every passing decade, the North was becoming wealthier and also more thickly settledan advantage reflected in an increasing northern majority in the House of Representatives.
Yet in the Senate, each state had two votes, regardless of size.
With eleven states free and eleven slave, the southerners had maintained equality.
They were therefore in a good position to thwart any northern effort to interfere with the expansion of slavery, and they did not want to lose this veto.
The future of the slave system caused southerners profound concern.
Missouri was the first state entirely west of the Mississippi River to be carved out of the Louisiana Purchase, and the Missouri emancipation amendment might set a damaging precedent for all the rest of the area.
Even more disquieting was another possibility.
If Congress could abolish the peculiar institution in Missouri, might it not attempt to do likewise in the older states of the South?
The wounds of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 were once more ripped open.
Burning moral questions also protruded, even though the main issue was political and economic balance.
A small but growing group of antislavery agitators in the North seized the occasion to raise an outcry against the evils of slavery.
They were determined that the plague of human bondage should not spread further into the virgin territories.
Deadlock in Washington was at length broken in 1820 by the time-honored American solution of compromiseactually a bundle of three compromises.
Courtly Henry Clay of Kentucky, gifted conciliator, played a leading role.
Congress, despite abolitionist pleas, agreed to admit Missouri as a slave state.
But at the same time, free-soil Maine, which until then had been a part of Massachusetts, was admitted as a separate state.
The balance between North and South was thus kept at twelve states each and remained there for fifteen years.
Although Missouri was permitted to retain slaves, all future bondage was prohibited in the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase north of the line of 36 30'the southern boundary of Missouri.
This horse-trading adjustment was politically evenhanded, though denounced by extremists on each side as a dirty bargain.
Both North and South yielded something; both gained something.
The South won the prize of Missouri as an unrestricted slave state.
The North won the concession that Congress could forbid slavery in the remaining territories.
More gratifying to many northerners was the fact that the immense area north of 36 30', except Missouri, was forever closed to the blight of slavery.
Yet the restriction on future slavery in the territories was not unduly offensive to the slaveowners, partly because the northern prairie land did not seem suited to slave labor.
Even so, a majority of  southern congressmen still voted against the  compromise.
Neither North nor South was acutely displeased, although neither was completely happy.
The Missouri Compromise lasted thirty-four yearsa vital formative period in the life of the young Republicand during that time it preserved the shaky compact of the states.
Yet the embittered dispute over slavery heralded the future breakup of the Union.
Ever after, the morality of the Souths peculiar institution was an issue that could not be swept under the rug.
The Missouri Compromise only ducked the questionit did not resolve it.
Sooner or later, Thomas Jefferson predicted, it will burst on us as a tornado.
The Missouri Compromise and the concurrent panic of 1819 should have dimmed the political star of President Monroe.
Certainly both unhappy events had a dampening effect on the Era of Good Feelings.
But smooth-spoken James Monroe was so popular, and the Federalist opposition so weak, that in the presidential election of 1820, he received every electoral vote except one.
Unanimity was an honor reserved for George Washington.
Monroe, as C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 The Missouri Compromise and Slavery, 18201821 Note the 36 30 line.
In the 1780s Thomas Jefferson had written of slavery in America, Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just; that his justice cannot sleep forever; that  .
the Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contest.
Now, at the time of the Missouri Compromise, Jefferson feared that his worst forebodings were coming to pass.
I considered it at once, he said of the Missouri question,  as the knell of the Union.
OREGON COUNTRY SPANISH TERRITORY UNORGANIZED  TERRITORY ALA.
CONN.
DEL.
ILL.
MICH.
TERR.
IND.
MASS.
TENN.
MISS.
N. C. S. C. VA.
OHIO N.J.
N.Y.
N.H.
R.I.
ARK.
TERR.
FLA.
TERR.
(Free Soil by Missouri Compromise, 1820) (Joint occupation by United States and Great Britain) (Admitted as a Free State, 1820) (Admitted as a Slave State, 1821) Free Slave Missouri Compromise line Spanish-United States treaty  line, 1819 The Missouri question .
is the most portentous one which ever yet threatened our Union.
In the gloomiest moment of the revolutionary war I never had any apprehensions equal to what I feel from this source.
[The] question, like a firebell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror.
[With slavery] we have a wolf by the ears, and we can neither hold him nor safely let him go.
I take it for granted that the present question is a mere preamblea title-page to a great, tragic volume.
it turned out, was the only president in American history to be reelected after a term in which a major financial panic began.
The upsurging nationalism of the post-Ghent years, despite the ominous setbacks concerning slavery, was further reflected and reinforced by the Supreme Court.
The high tribunal continued to be dominated by the tall, thin, and aggressive Chief Justice John Marshall.
One group of his decisionsperhaps the most famousbolstered the power of the federal government at the expense of the states.
A notable case in this category was  (1819).
The suit involved an attempt by the state of Maryland to destroy a branch of the Bank of the United States by imposing a tax on its notes.
John Marshall, speaking for the Court, declared the bank constitutional by invoking the Hamiltonian doctrine of implied powers (see p.
195).
At the same time, he strengthened federal authority and slapped at state infringements when he denied the right of Maryland to tax the bank.
With ringing emphasis, he affirmed that the power to tax involves the power to destroy and that a power to create implies a power to preserve.
Marshalls ruling in this case gave the doctrine of loose construction its most famous formulation.
The Constitution, he said, derived from the consent of the people and thus permitted the government to act for their benefit.
He further argued that the Constitution was intended to endure for ages to come and, consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs.
Finally, he declared, Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are constitutional.
Two years later (1821) the case of  ties to defend the federal power.
The Cohens, found guilty by the Virginia courts of illegally selling lottery tickets, appealed to the highest tribunal.
Virginia won, in the sense that the conviction of the Cohens was upheld.
But in fact Virginia and all the individual states lost, because Marshall resoundingly asserted the right of the Supreme Court to review the decisions of the state supreme courts in all questions involving powers of the federal government.
The states rights proponents were aghast.
Hardly less significant was the celebrated steamboat case,  grew out of an attempt by the state of New York to grant to a private concern a monopoly of waterborne commerce between New York and New Jersey.
Marshall sternly reminded the upstart state that the Constitution conferred on Congress alone the control of interstate commerce (see Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
He thus struck with one hand another blow at states rights, while upholding with the other the sovereign powers of the federal government.
Interstate streams were cleared of this judicial snag;  the departed spirit of Hamilton may well have applauded.
he Old Northwest beckoned to settlers after the War of 1812.
The withdrawal of the British protector weakened the Indians grip on the territory.
Then the transportation boom of the 1820ssteamboats on the Ohio, the National Highway stretching from Pennsylvania, the Erie Canalopened broad arteries along which the westward movement flowed.
The first wave of newcomers came mainly from Kentucky, Tennessee, and the upland regions of Virginia and the Carolinas.
Most migrants were roughhewn white farmers who had been pushed from good land to bad by an expanding plantation economy.
Like Joseph Cress of North Carolina, they were relieved to relinquish them old red filds where you get nothing, in return for acres of new soil that is as black and rich you wold want it.
Some settlers acquired land for the first time.
John Palmer, whose family left Kentucky for Illinois in 1831, recalled his father telling him of land so cheap that we could  all be landholders, where men were all  Migrants from the South settled mainly in the southern portions of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
As Palmer testified, the Old Northwest offered southern farmers an escape from the lowly social position they had endured as nonslaveholders in a slave society.
Not that they objected to slavery or sympathized with blacks.
Far from it: by enacting Black Codes in their new territories, they tried to prevent blacks from following them to paradise.
They wanted their own democratic community, free of rich planters and African-Americans alike.
If southern Butternuts, as these settlers were called, dominated settlement in the 1820s, the next decade brought Yankees from the Northeast.
They were as land-starved as their southern counterparts.
A growing population had gobbled up most of the good land east of the Appalachians.
Yankee settlers came to the Old Northwest, especially to the northern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, eager to make the region a profitable breadbasket for the Atlantic seaboard.
Unlike Butternuts who wanted to quit forever the imposing framework of southern society, northerners hoped to re-create the world they had left behind.
Conflict soon emerged between Yankees and southerners.
As self-sufficient farmers with little interest in producing for the market, the southerners viewed the northern newcomers as inhospitable, greedy, and excessively ambitious.
Yankee became a term of reproach; a person who was cheated was said to have been Yankeed.
Northerners, in turn, viewed the southerners as uncivilized, a coon dog and butcher knife tribe with no interest in education, self-improvement, or agricultural innovation.
Yankees, eager to tame both the land and its people, wanted to establish public schools and build roads, canals, and railroadsand they advocated taxes  to fund such progress.
Southerners opposed all these reforms, especially public schooling, which they regarded as an attempt to northernize their children.
Religion divided settlers as well.
Northerners, typically Congregationalists and Presbyterians, wanted their ministers to be educated in seminaries.
Southerners embraced the more revivalist Baptist and Methodist denominations.
They preferred poor, humble preacher-farmers to professionally trained preachers whom they viewed as too distant from the Lord and the people.
As the Baptist preacher Alexander Campbell put it, The scheme of a learned priesthood .
has long since proved itself to be a grand device to keep men in ignorance and bondage.
Not everyone, of course, fitted neatly into these molds.
Abraham Lincoln, with roots in Kentucky, came to adopt views more akin to those of the  Yankees than the southerners, whereas his New Englandborn archrival, Stephen Douglas, carefully cultivated the Butternut vote for the Illinois Democratic party.
As the population swelled and the region acquired its own character, the stark contrasts between northerners and southerners started to fade.
By the 1850s northerners dominated numerically, and they succeeded in establishing public schools and fashioning internal improvements.
Railroads and Great Lakes shipping tied the region ever more tightly to the northeast.
Yankees and southerners sometimes allied as new kinds of cleavages emergedbetween rich and poor, between city dwellers and farmers, and, once Irish and German immigrants started pouring into the region, between native Protestants and newcomer Catholics.
Still, echoes of the clash between Yankees and Butternuts persisted.
During the Civil War, the southern counties of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, where southerners had first settled, harbored sympathizers with the South and served as a key area for Confederate military infiltration into the North.
Decades later these same counties became a stronghold of the Ku Klux Klan.
The Old Northwest may have become firmly anchored economically to the Northeast, but vestiges of its early dual personality persisted.
Another sheaf of Marshalls decisions bolstered judicial barriers against democratic or demagogic attacks on property rights.
The notorious case of  arose when a Georgia legislature, swayed by bribery, granted 35 million acres in the Yazoo River country (Mississippi) to private speculators.
The next legislature, yielding to an angry public outcry, canceled the crooked transaction.
But the Supreme Court, with Marshall presiding, decreed that the legislative grant was a contract (even though fraudulently secured) and that the Constitution forbids state laws impairing contracts (Art.
I, Sec.
X, para.
The decision was perhaps most noteworthy as further protecting property rights against popular pressures.
It was also one of the earliest clear assertions of the right of the Supreme Court to invalidate state laws conflicting with the federal Constitution.
A similar principle was upheld in the case of best remembered of Marshalls decisions.
The college had been granted a charter by King George III in 1769, but the democratic New Hampshire state legislature had seen fit to change it.
Dartmouth appealed the case, employing as counsel its most distinguished alumnus, Daniel Webster (01).
The Godlike Daniel reportedly pulled out all the stops of his tear-inducing eloquence when he declaimed, It is, sir, as I have said, a small college.
And yet there are those who love it.
Marshall needed no dramatics in the  when he ruled that the original charter must stand.
It was a contractand the Constitution protected contracts against state encroachments.
The  guarding business enterprise from domination by the states governments.
But it had the unfortunate effect of creating a precedent that enabled chartered corporations, in later years, to escape the handcuffs of needed public control.
If John Marshall was a Molding Father of the Constitution, Daniel Webster was an Expounding Father.
Time and again he left his seat in the Senate, stepped downstairs to the Supreme Court chamber (then located in the Capitol building), and there expounded his Federalistic and nationalistic philosophy before the supreme bench.
The eminent chief justice, so Webster reported, approvingly drank in the familiar arguments as a baby sucks in its mothers milk.
The two men dovetailed strikingly with each other.
Websters classic speeches in the Senate, challenging states rights and nullification, were largely repetitious of the arguments that he had earlier presented before a sympathetic Supreme Court.
C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 The chief place in the supreme tribunal of the Union will no longer be filled by a man whose political doctrines led him always .
to strengthen government at the expense of the people.
Marshalls decisions are felt even today.
In this sense his nationalism was the most tenaciously enduring of the era.
He buttressed the federal Union and helped to create a stable, nationally uniform environment for business.
At the same time, Marshall checked the excesses of popularly elected state legislatures.
In an age when white manhood suffrage was flowering and America was veering toward stronger popular control, Marshall almost singlehandedly shaped the Constitution along conservative, centralizing lines that ran somewhat counter to the dominant spirit of the new country.
Through him the conservative Hamiltonians partly triumphed from the tomb.
The robust nationalism of the years after the War of 1812 was likewise reflected in the shaping of foreign policy.
To this end, the nationalistic President Monroe teamed with his nationalistic secretary of state, John Quincy Adams, the cold and scholarly son of the frosty and bookish ex-president.
The younger Adams, a statesman of the first rank, happily rose above the ingrown Federalist sectionalism of his native New England and proved to be one of the great secretaries of state.
To its credit, the Monroe administration negotiated the much-underrated Treaty of 1818 with Britain.
This pact permitted Americans to share the coveted Newfoundland fisheries with their Canadian cousins.
This multisided agreement also fixed the vague northern limits of Louisiana along the forty-ninth parallel from the Lake of the Woods (Minnesota) to the Rocky Mountains (see the map below).
The treaty further provided for a ten-year joint occupation of the untamed Oregon Country, without a surrender of the rights or claims of either America or Britain.
To the south lay semitropical Spanish Florida, which many Americans believed geography and providence had destined to become part of the United States.
Americans already claimed West Florida, where uninvited American settlers had torn down the hated Spanish flag in 1810.
Congress ratified this grab in 1812, and during the War of 1812 against Spains ally, Britain, a small American army seized the Mobile region.
But the bulk of Florida remained, tauntingly, under Spanish rule.
When an epidemic of revolutions broke out  in South America, notably in Argentina (1816), Venezuela (1817), and Chile (1818), Spain was forced to denude Florida of troops to fight the rebels.
General Andrew Jackson, idol of the West and scourge of the Indians, saw opportunity in the undefended swamplands.
On the pretext that hostile Seminole Indians and fugitive slaves were using Florida as a refuge, Jackson secured a commission to enter Spanish territory, punish the Indians, and recapture the runaways.
But he was to respect all posts under the Spanish flag.
Early in 1818 Jackson swept across the Florida border with all the fury of an avenging angel.
He hanged two Indian chiefs without ceremony and, (10-year joint occupation, renewable) 49  Natural boundary of Louisiana Territory Treaty boundary U.S.-British Boundary Settlement, 1818 Note that the United States gained considerable territory by securing a treaty boundary rather than the natural boundary of the Missouri River watershed.
The line of 49 was extended westward to the Pacific Ocean under the Treaty of 1846 with Britain (see p.
380).
after hasty military trials, executed two British subjects for assisting the Indians.
He also seized the two most important Spanish posts in the area, St.
Marks and then Pensacola, where he deposed the Spanish governor, who was lucky enough to escape Jacksons jerking noose.
Jackson had clearly exceeded his instructions from Washington.
Alarmed, President Monroe consulted his cabinet.
Its members were for disavowing or disciplining the overzealous Jacksonall except the lone wolf John Quincy Adams, who refused to howl with the pack.
An ardent patriot and nationalist, the flinty New Englander took the offensive and demanded huge concessions from Spain.
In the mislabeled Florida Purchase Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded Florida, as well as shadowy Spanish claims to Oregon, in exchange for Americas abandonment of equally murky claims to Texas, soon to become part of independent Mexico.
The hitherto vague western boundary of Louisiana was made to run zigzag along the Rockies to the fortysecond parallel and then to turn due west to the Pacific, dividing Oregon from Spanish holdings.
After the Napoleonic nightmare, the rethroned autocrats of Europe banded together in a kind of monarchical protective association.
Determined to restore the good old days, they undertook to stamp out the democratic tendencies that had sprouted from soil they considered richly manured by the ideals of the French Revolution.
The world must be made safe  The crowned despots acted promptly.
With complete ruthlessness they smothered the embers of rebellion in Italy (1821) and in Spain (1823).
According to the European rumor factory, they were also gazing across the Atlantic.
Russia, Austria, Prussia, and France, acting in partnership, would presumably send powerful fleets and armies to the revolted colonies of Spanish America and there restore the autocratic Spanish king to his ancestral domains.
Many Americans were alarmed.
Sympathetic  to democratic revolutions everywhere, they had C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 (March 1814)   Baton Rouge Mobile Pensacola St.
Marks MISSISSIPPI    TERR.
W E S T   F L O R I D A GEORGIA LA.
EAST FLORIDA S.C.
To U.S.
1810 To U.S.
18121813 To U.S.
1819 Jackson's route, 1814 Jackson's route, 1818 The Southeast, 18101819 cheered when the Latin American republics rose from the ruins of monarchy.
Americans feared that if the European powers intervened in the New World, the cause of republicanism would suffer irreparable harm.
The physical security of the United Statesthe mother lode of democracy would be endangered by the proximity of powerful and unfriendly forces.
The southward push of the Russian bear, from the chill region now known as Alaska, had already publicized the menace of monarchy to North America.
In 1821 the tsar of Russia issued a decree extending Russian jurisdiction over one hundred miles of the open sea down to the line of 51, an  area that embraced most of the coast of presentday British Columbia.
The energetic Russians had already established trading posts almost as far south as the entrance to San Francisco Bay, and the fear prevailed in the United States that they were planning to cut the Republic off from California, its prospective window on the Pacific.
Great Britain, still Mistress of the Seas, was now beginning to play a lone-hand role on the complicated international stage.
In particular, it recoiled from joining hands with the continental European powers in crushing the newly won liberties of  the Spanish-Americans.
These revolutionists had thrown open their monopoly-bound ports to outside trade, and British shippers, as well as Americans, had found the profits sweet.
Accordingly, in August 1823, George Canning, the haughty British foreign secretary, approached the American minister in London with a startling proposition.
Would not the United States combine with Britain in a joint declaration renouncing any interest in acquiring Latin American territory, and specifically warning the European despots to keep their harsh hands off the Latin American republics?
The American minister, lacking instructions, referred this fateful scheme to his superiors in Washington.
The tenacious nationalist, Secretary Adams, was hardheaded enough to be wary of Britons bearing gifts.
Why should the lordly British, with the mightiest navy afloat, need America as an allyan America that had neither naval nor military strength?
Such a union, argued Adams, was undignifiedlike a tiny American cockboat sailing in the wake of the British man-of-war.
Adams, ever alert, thought that he detected the joker in the Canning proposal.
The British feared that the aggressive Yankees would one day seize Spanish territory in the Americasperhaps Cuba which would jeopardize Britains possessions in the Caribbean.
If Canning could seduce the United States into joining with him in support of the territorial integrity of the New World, Americas own hands would be morally tied.
A self-denying alliance with Britain would not only hamper American expansion, concluded Adams, but it was unnecessary.
He suspectedcorrectlythat the European powers had not hatched any definite plans for invading the Americas.
In any event the British navy would prevent the approach of hostile fleets because the South American markets had to be kept open at all costs for British merchants.
It was presumably safe for Uncle Sam, behind the protective wooden petticoats of the British navy, to blow a defiant, nationalistic blast at all of Europe.
The distresses of the Old World set the stage once again for an American diplomatic coup.
The Monroe Doctrine was born late in 1823, when the nationalistic Adams won the nationalistic Monroe over to his way of thinking.
The president, in his regular annual message to Congress on December 2, 1823, incorporated a stern warning to the European powers.
Its two basic features were  (1) noncolonization and (2) nonintervention.
Monroe first directed his verbal volley primarily at the lumbering Russian bear in the Northwest.
He proclaimed, in effect, that the era of colonization in the Americas had ended and that henceforth the hunting season was permanently closed.
What the great powers had they might keep, but neither they nor any other Old World governments could seize or otherwise acquire more.
At the same time, Monroe trumpeted a warning against foreign intervention.
He was clearly concerned with regions to the south, where fears were felt for the fledgling Spanish-American republics.
Monroe bluntly directed the crowned heads of Europe to keep their hated monarchical systems out of this hemisphere.
For its part the United States would not intervene in the war that the Greeks were then fighting against the Turks for their independence.
The ermined monarchs of Europe were angered at Monroes doctrine.
Having resented the incendiary American experiment from the beginning, they were now deeply offended by Monroes high-flown pronouncementall the more so because of the gulf between Americas loud pretensions and its soft military strength.
But though offended by the upstart Yankees, the European powers found their hands tied, and their frustration increased their annoyance.
Even if they had worked out plans for invading the Americas, they would have been helpless before the booming broadsides of the British navy.
Monroes solemn warning, when issued, made little splash in the newborn republics to the south.
Anyone could see that Uncle Sam was only secondarily concerned about his neighbors, because he was primarily concerned about defending himself against future invasion.
Only a relatively few educated Latin Americans knew of the message, and they generally recognized that the British navynot the paper pronouncement of James Monroestood between them and a hostile Europe.
In truth, Monroes message did not have much contemporary significance.
Americans applauded it and then forgot it.
Not until 1845 did President Polk revive it, and not until midcentury did it become an important national dogma.
Even before Monroes stiff message, the tsar had decided to retreat.
This he formally did in the RussoAmerican Treaty of 1824, which fixed his southernmost limits at the line of 54 40'the present southern tip of the Alaska panhandle.
The Monroe Doctrine might more accurately have been called the Self-Defense Doctrine.
President Monroe was concerned basically with the security of his own countrynot of Latin America.
The United States has never willingly permitted a powerful foreign nation to secure a foothold near its strategic Caribbean vitals.
Yet in the absence of the British navy or other allies, the strength of the Monroe Doctrine has never been greater than Americas power to eject the trespasser.
The doctrine, as often noted, was just as big as the nations armed forces and no bigger.
The Monroe Doctrine has had a long career of ups and downs.
It was never lawdomestic or international.
It was not, technically speaking, a C HAPTER 12 The Second War for Independence and the Upsurge of Nationalism, 18121824 The West and Northwest, 18191824 The British Hudsons Bay Company moved to secure its claim to the Oregon Country in 1824, when it sent a heavily armed expedition led by Peter Skene Ogden into the Snake River country.
In May 1825 Ogdens party descended the Bear River and found it discharged into a large Lake of 100 miles in length one of the first documented sightings by white explorers of Great Salt Lake.
(The mountain man Jim Bridger is usually credited with being the first white man to see the lake.
) pledge or an agreement.
It was merely a simple, personalized statement of the policy of President Monroe.
What one president says, another may unsay.
And Monroes successors have ignored, revived, distorted, or expanded the original version, chiefly by adding interpretations.
Like ivy on a tree, it has grown with Americas growth.
But the Monroe Doctrine in 1823 was largely an expression of the post-1812 nationalism energizing the United States.
Although directed at a specific menace in 1823, and hence a kind of period piece, the doctrine proved to be the most famous of all the long-lived offspring of that nationalism.
While giving voice to a spirit of patriotism, it simultaneously deepened the illusion of isolationism.
Many Americans falsely concluded, then and later, that the Republic was in fact insulated from European dangers simply because it wanted to be and because, in a nationalistic outburst, Monroe had publicly warned the Old World powers to stay away.
Supreme Court to invalidate state laws deemed unconstitutional United States declares war on Britain Madison reelected president American invasions of Canada fail Battle of the Thames Battle of Lake Erie Battle of Plattsburgh British burn Washington Battle of Horseshoe Bend Treaty of Ghent signed Hartford Convention Battle of New Orleans Second Bank of the United States founded Protectionist Tariff of 1816 Monroe elected president Madison vetoes Calhouns Bonus Bill Rush-Bagot agreement limits naval armament on Great Lakes Treaty of 1818 with Britain Jackson invades Florida Panic of 1819 Spain cedes Florida to United States Missouri Compromise Missouri and Maine admitted to Union Land Act of 1820 Monroe reelected Secretary Adams proposes Monroe Doctrine Russo-American Treaty of 1824 Erie Canal completed For further reading, see page A8 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Rise of a Mass Democracy  18241840 A NDREW J ACKSON , 1832 T he so-called Era of Good Feelings was never entirely tranquil, but even the illusion of national consensus was shattered by the panic of 1819 and the Missouri Compromise of 1820.
Economic distress and the slavery issue raised the political stakes in the 1820s and 1830s.
Vigorous political conflict, once feared, came to be celebrated as necessary for the health of democracy.
New political parties emerged.
New styles of campaigning took hold.
A new chapter opened in the history of American politics.
The political landscape of 1824 was similar, in its broad outlines, to that of 1796.
By 1840 it would be almost unrecognizable.
The deference, apathy, and virtually nonexistent party organizations of the Era of Good Feelings yielded to the boisterous democracy, frenzied vitality, and strong political parties of the Jacksonian era.
The old suspicion of political parties as illegitimate disrupters of societys natural harmony gave way to an acceptance of the sometimes wild contentiousness of political life.
In 1828 an energetic new party, the Democrats, captured the White House.
By the 1830s the Democrats faced an equally vigorous opposition party in the form of the Whigs.
This two-party system institutionalized divisions that had vexed the Revolutionary generation and came to constitute an important part of the nations checks and balances on political power.
New forms of politicking emerged in this era, as candidates used banners, badges, parades, barbecues, free drinks, and baby kissing to get out the vote.
Voter turnout rose dramatically.
Only about one-quarter of eligible voters cast a ballot in the presidential election of 1824, but that proportion doubled in 1828, and in the election of 1840 it reached 78 percent.
Everywhere the people flexed their political muscles.
The last of the old-style elections was marked by the controversial corrupt bargain of 1824.
The woods were full of presidential timber as James Monroe, last of the Virginia dynasty, completed his second term.
Four candidates towered above the others: John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts, highly intelligent, experienced, and aloof; Henry Clay of Kentucky, the gamy and gallant Harry of the West; William H. Crawford of Georgia, an able though ailing giant of a man; and Andrew Jackson of Tennessee, the gaunt and gusty hero of New Orleans.
All four rivals professed to be Republicans.
Well-organized parties had not yet emerged; their identities were so fuzzy, in fact, that John C. Calhoun appeared as the vice-presidential candidate on both the Adams and the Jackson tickets.
The results of the noisy campaign were interesting but confusing.
Jackson, the war hero, clearly had the strongest personal appeal, especially in the West, where his campaign against the forces of corruption and privilege in government resonated deeply.
He polled almost as many popular votes as his next two rivals combined, but he failed to win  a majority of the electoral vote (see the table on  p.
258).
In such a deadlock, the House of Representatives, as directed by the Twelfth Amendment (see the Appendix), must choose among the top three candidates.
Clay was thus eliminated, yet as Speaker of the House, he presided over the very chamber that had to pick the winner.
The influential Clay was in a position to throw the election to the candidate of his choice.
He reached his decision by the process of elimination.
Crawford, recently felled by a paralytic stroke, was out of the picture.
Clay hated the military chieftain Jackson, his archrival for the allegiance of the West.
Jackson, in turn, bitterly resented Clays public denunciation of his Florida foray in 1818.
The only candidate left was the puritanical Adams, with whom Claya free-living gambler and duelisthad never established cordial personal relations.
But the two men had much in common politically: both were fervid nationalists and advocates of the American System.
Shortly before the final balloting in the House, Clay met privately with Adams and assured him of his support.
Decision day came early in 1825.
The House of Representatives met amid tense excitement, with sick members being carried in on stretchers.
On  the first ballot, thanks largely to Clays behind-thescenes influence, Adams was elected president.
A few days later, the victor announced that Henry Clay would be the new secretary of state.
The office of secretary of state was the prize plum then, even more so than today.
Three of the four preceding secretaries had reached the presidency, and the high cabinet office was regarded as an almost certain pathway to the White House.
By allegedly dangling the position as a bribe before Clay, Adams, the second choice of the people, apparently defeated  Jackson, the peoples first choice.
Masses of angry Jacksonians, most of them common folk, raised a roar of protest against this corrupt bargain.
The clamor continued for nearly four years.
Jackson condemned Clay as the Judas of the West, and John Randolph of Virginia publicly assailed the alliance between the Puritan [Adams] and the black-leg [Clay], who, he added shines and stinks like rotten mackerel by moonlight.
Clay, C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 Jackson 99 153,544 42.16% Adams 84 108,740 31.89 % Crawford 41 46,618 12.95 % Clay 37 47,136 12.99 % outraged, challenged Randolph to a duel, though poor marksmanship and shaky nerves rendered the outcome bloodless.
No positive evidence has yet been unearthed to prove that Adams and Clay entered into a formal bargain.
Clay was a natural choice for secretary of state, and Adams was both scrupulously honest and not given to patronage.
Even if a bargain had been struck, it was not necessarily corrupt.
Deals of this nature have long been the stock-in-trade of politicians.
But the outcry over Adamss election showed that change was in the wind.
What had once been common practice was now condemned as furtive, elitist, and subversive of democracy.
The next president would not be chosen behind closed doors.
John Quincy Adams was a chip off the old family glacier.
Short, thickset, and billiard-bald, he was even more frigidly austere than his presidential father, John Adams.
Shunning people, he often went for early-morning swims, sometimes stark naked, in the then-pure Potomac River.
Essentially a closeted thinker rather than a politician, he was irritable, sarcastic, and tactless.
Yet few individuals have ever come to the presidency with a more brilliant record in statecraft, especially in foreign affairs.
He ranks as one of the most successful secretaries of state, yet one of the least successful presidents.
A man of puritanical honor, Adams entered upon his four-year sentence in the White House smarting under charges of bargain, corruption, and usurpation.
Fewer than one-third of the voters had voted for him.
As the first minority president, he would have found it difficult to win popular support even under the most favorable conditions.
He did not possess many of the usual arts of the politician and scorned those who did.
He had achieved high office by commanding respect rather than by courting popularity.
In an earlier era, an aloof John Adams had won the votes of propertied men by sheer ability.
But with the dawning age of backslapping and baby-kissing democracy, his cold-fish son could hardly hope for success at the polls.
While Adamss enemies accused him of striking a corrupt bargain, his political allies wished that he would strike a few more.
Whether through highmindedness or political ineptitude, Adams resolutely declined to oust efficient officeholders in order to create vacancies for his supporters.
During his entire administration, he removed only twelve public servants from the federal payroll.
Such stubbornness caused countless Adams followers to throw up their hands in despair.
If the president would not reward party workers with political plums, why should they labor to keep him in office?
Adamss nationalistic views gave him further woes.
Much of the nation was turning away from post-Ghent nationalism and toward states rights and sectionalism.
But Adams swam against the  tide.
Confirmed nationalist that he was, Adams urged upon Congress in his first annual message  the construction of roads and canals.
He renewed George Washingtons proposal for a national university and went so far as to advocate federal support for an astronomical observatory.
The public reaction to these proposals was prompt and unfavorable.
To many workaday Americans grubbing out stumps, astronomical observatories seemed like a scandalous waste of public funds.
The South in particular bristled.
If the federal government should take on such heavy financial burdens, it would have to continue the hated tariff duties.
Worse, if it could meddle in local concerns like education and roads, it might even try to lay its hand on the peculiar institution of black slavery.
Adamss land policy likewise antagonized the westerners.
They clamored for wide-open expansion and resented the presidents well-meaning attempts to curb feverish speculation in the public domain.
The fate of the Cherokee Indians, threatened with eviction from their holdings in Georgia, brought additional bitterness.
White Georgians wanted the Cherokees out.
The ruggedly honest Adams attempted to deal fairly with the Indians.
The Georgia governor, by threatening to resort to arms, successfully resisted the efforts of the Washington government to interpose federal authority on behalf of the Cherokees.
Another fateful chapter was thus written in the nullification of the national willand another nail was driven in Adamss political coffin.
The presidential campaign for Andrew Jackson had started earlyon February 9, 1825, the day of  John Quincy Adamss controversial election by the Houseand it continued noisily for nearly four years.
Even before the election of 1828, the temporarily united Republicans of the Era of Good Feelings had split into two camps.
One was the National Republicans, with Adams as their standard-bearer.
The other was the Democratic-Republicans, with the fiery Jackson heading their ticket.
Rallying cries of the Jackson zealots were Bargain and Corruption, Huzza for Jackson, and All Hail Old Hickory.
Jacksonites planted hickory poles for their hickory-tough hero; Adamsites adopted the oak as the symbol of their oakenly independent candidate.
Jacksons followers presented their hero as a rough-hewn frontiersman and a stalwart champion of the common man.
They denounced Adams as a corrupt aristocrat and argued that the will of the people had been thwarted in 1825 by the backstairs bargain of Adams and Clay.
The only way to right the wrong was to seat Jackson, who would then bring about reform by sweeping out the dishonest Adams gang.
Much of this talk was political hyperbole.
Jackson was no frontier farmer but a wealthy planter.
He was born in a log cabin but now lived in a luxurious manor off the labor of his many slaves.
And Adams, though perhaps an aristocrat, was far from corrupt.
If anything, his puritanical morals were too elevated for the job.
Mudslinging reached new lows in 1828, and the electorate developed a taste for bare-knuckle politics.
Adams would not stoop to gutter tactics, but many of his backers were less squeamish.
They described Jacksons mother as a prostitute and his wife as an adulteress; they printed black-bordered handbills shaped like coffins, recounting his numerous duels and brawls and trumpeting his hanging of six mutinous militiamen.
Jackson men also hit below the belt.
President Adams had purchased, with his own money and for his own use, a billiard table and a set of chessmen.
In the mouths of rabid Jacksonites, these items became gaming tables and gambling furniture for the presidential palace.
Criticism was also directed at the large sums Adams had received over the years in federal salaries, well earned though they had been.
He was even accused of having procured a servant girl for the lust of the Russian tsarin short, of having served as a pimp.
C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 General Jacksons mother was a Common Prostitute, brought to this country by the British soldiers!
She afterwards married a  MULATTO man with whom she had several children, of which number  GENERAL JACKSON is one.
On voting day the electorate split on largely sectional lines.
Jacksons strongest support came from the West and South.
The middle states and the Old Northwest were divided, while Adams won the backing of his own New England and the propertied better elements of the Northeast.
But when the popular vote was converted to electoral votes, General Jacksons triumph could not be denied.
Old Hickory had trounced Adams by an electoral count of 178 to 83.
Although a considerable part of Jacksons support was lined up by machine politicians in eastern cities, particularly in New York and Pennsylvania, the political center of gravity clearly had shifted away from the conservative eastern seaboard toward the emerging states across the  mountains.
The new president cut a striking figuretall, lean, with bushy iron-gray hair brushed high above a prominent forehead, craggy eyebrows, and blue eyes.
His irritability and emaciated condition resulted in part from long-term bouts with dysentery, malaria, tuberculosis, and lead poisoning from two bullets that he carried in his body from near-fatal duels.
His autobiography was written in his lined face.
Jacksons upbringing had its shortcomings.
Born in the Carolinas and early orphaned, Mischievous Andy grew up without parental restraints.
As a youth he displayed much more interest in brawling and cockfighting than in his scanty opportunities for reading and spelling.
Although he eventually learned to express himself in writing with vigor and clarity, his grammar was always rough-hewn and his spelling original, like that of many contemporaries.
He sometimes misspelled a word two different ways in the same letter.
;; ; ; ;; ; N.Y.
36 MICHIGAN TERRITORY UNORGANIZED TERRITORY MO.
3 ARK.
TERR.
5 MISS.
3 ALA.
5 GA.
9 FLORIDA         TERR.
TENN.
11 N.C.
15 S.C.
11 VA.
24 W. VA.
8 PA.
28 OHIO 16 IND.
5 ILL.
3 KY.
14 ME.
9 N.H.
8 VT.
7 MASS.
15 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
8 DEL.
3 MD.
11 JacksonDemocratic AdamsNational Republican Divided ;; Presidential Election of 1828 (with electoral vote by state) Jackson swept the South and West, whereas Adams retained the old Federalist stronghold of the Northeast.
Yet Jacksons inroads in the Northeast were decisive.
He won twenty of New Yorks electoral votes and all twenty-eight of Pennsylvanias.
If those votes had gone the other way, Adams would have been victoriousby a margin of one vote.
The youthful Carolinian shrewdly moved up West to Tennessee, where fighting was prized above writing.
Therethrough native intelligence, force of personality, and powers of leadership he became a judge and a member of Congress.
Afflicted with a violent temper, he early became involved in a number of duels, stabbings, and bloody frays.
His passions were so profound that on occasion he would choke into silence when he tried to speak.
The first president from the West, the first nominated at a formal party convention (in 1832), and only the second without a college education (Washington was the first), Jackson was unique.
His university was adversity.
He had risen from the masses, but he was not one of them, except insofar as he shared many of their prejudices.
Essentially a frontier aristocrat, he owned many slaves, cultivated broad acres, and lived in one of the finest mansions in Americathe Hermitage, near Nashville, Tennessee.
More westerner than easterner, more country gentleman than common clay, more courtly than crude, he was hard to fit into a neat category.
Jacksons inauguration seemed to symbolize  the ascendancy of the masses.
Hickoryites poured into Washington from far away, sleeping on hotel floors and in hallways.
They were curious to see their hero take office and perhaps hoped to pick up a well-paying office for themselves.
Nobodies mingled with notables as the White House, for the first time, was thrown open to the multitude.
A milling crowd of clerks, shopkeepers, hobnailed artisans, and grimy laborers surged in, wrecking the china and furniture and threatening the peoples champion with cracked ribs.
Jackson was hastily spirited through a side door, and the White House miraculously emptied itself when the word was passed that huge bowls of well-spiked punch had been placed on the lawns.
Such was the inaugural brawl.
To conservatives this orgy seemed like the end of the world.
King Mob reigned triumphant as Jacksonian vulgarity replaced Jeffersonian simplicity.
Faint-hearted traditionalists shuddered, drew their blinds, and recalled with trepidation the opening scenes of the French Revolution.
Once in power, the Democrats, famously suspicious of the federal government, demonstrated that they were not above striking some bargains of their own.
Under Jackson the spoils systemthat is, rewarding political supporters with public officewas introduced into the federal government on a large scale.
The basic idea was as old as politics.
Its name came later from Senator William Marcys classic remark in 1832, To the victor belong the spoils of the enemy.
The system had already secured a firm hold in  New York and Pennsylvania, where well-greased machines ladled out the gravy of office.
Jackson defended the spoils system on democratic grounds.
Every man is as good as his neighbor, he declaredperhaps equally better.
As this was believed to be so, and as the routine of office was thought to be simple enough for any upstanding American to learn quickly, why encourage the development of an aristocratic, bureaucratic, officeholding class?
Better to bring in new blood, he argued; each generation deserved its turn at the public trough.
Washington was due, it is true, for a housecleaning.
No party overturn had occurred since the defeat of the Federalists in 1800, and even that  had not produced wholesale evictions.
A few officeholders, their commissions signed by President Washington, were lingering on into their eighties, drawing breath and salary but doing little else.
But the spoils system was less about finding new blood than about rewarding old cronies.
Throw their rascals out and put our rascals in, the Democrats  were essentially saying.
The questions asked of each appointee were not What can he do for the country?
but What has he done for the party?
or Is he loyal to Jackson?
Scandal inevitably accompanied the new system.
Men who had openly bought their posts by C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 When I was President of the Senate he was a Senator; and he could never speak on account of the rashness of his feelings.
I have seen him attempt it repeatedly, and as often choke with rage.
His passions are no doubt cooler now .
but he is a dangerous man.
campaign contributions were appointed to high office.
Illiterates, incompetents, and plain crooks were given positions of public trust; scoundrels lusted for the spoilsrather than the toilsof office.
Samuel Swartwout, despite ample warnings of his untrustworthiness, was awarded the lucrative post of collector of the customs of the port of New York.
Nearly nine years later, he Swartwouted out for England, leaving his accounts more than a million dollars shortthe first person to steal a million from the Washington government.
But despite its undeniable abuse, the spoils system was an important element of the emerging twoparty order, cementing as it did loyalty to party over competing claims based on economic class or geographic region.
The promise of patronage provided a compelling reason for Americans to pick a party and stick with it through thick and thin.
The touchy tariff issue had been one of John Quincy Adamss biggest headaches.
Now Andrew Jackson felt his predecessors pain.
Tariffs protected American industry against competition from European manufactured goods, but they also drove up prices for all Americans and invited retaliatory tariffs on American agricultural exports abroad.
The middle states had long been supporters of protectionist tariffs.
In the 1820s influential New Englanders like Daniel Webster gave up their traditional defense of free trade to support higher tariffs, too.
The wool and textile industries were booming, and forwardthinking Yankees came to believe that their future prosperity would flow from the factory rather than from the sea.
In 1824 Congress had increased the general tariff significantly, but wool manufacturers bleated for still-higher barriers.
Ardent Jacksonites now played a cynical political game.
They promoted a hightariff bill, expecting to be defeated, which would give a black eye to President Adams.
To their surprise, the tariff passed in 1828, and Andrew Jackson inherited the political hot potato.
Southerners, as heavy consumers of manufactured goods with little manufacturing industry of their own, were hostile to tariffs.
They were particularly shocked by what they regarded as the outrageous rates of the Tariff of 1828.
Hotheads  branded it the Black Tariff or the Tariff of Abominations.
Several southern states adopted formal protests.
In South Carolina flags were lowered to half-mast.
Let the  cried one eloquent South Carolinian.
Why did the South react so angrily against  the tariff?
Southerners believed, not illogically, that the Yankee tariff discriminated against them.
The bustling Northeast was experiencing a boom in manufacturing, the developing West was prospering from rising property values and a multiplying population, and the energetic Southwest was expanding into virgin cotton lands.
But the Old South was falling on hard times, and the tariff provided a convenient and plausible scapegoat.
Southerners sold their cotton and other farm produce in a world  market completely unprotected by tariffs but  were forced to buy their manufactured goods in  an American market heavily protected by tariffs.
Protectionism protected Yankee and middle-state manufacturers.
The farmers and planters of the Old South felt they were stuck with the bill.
But much deeper issues underlay the southern outcryin particular, a growing anxiety about possible federal interference with the institution of slavery.
The congressional debate on the Missouri Compromise had kindled those anxieties, and they were further fanned by an aborted slave rebellion in Charleston in 1822, led by a free black named Denmark Vesey.
The South Carolinians, still closely tied to the British West Indies, also know full well that their slaveowning West Indian cousins were feeling the mounting pressure of British abolitionism on the London government.
Abolitionism in America might similarly use the power of the government in Washington to suppress slavery in the South.
If so, now was the time, and the tariff was the issue, to take a strong stand on principle against all federal encroachments on states rights.
South Carolinians took the lead in protesting against the Tariff of Abominations.
Their legislature went so far as to publish in 1828, though without formal endorsement, a pamphlet known as  ten by John C. Calhoun, one of the few topflight political theorists ever produced by America.
(As vice president, he was forced to conceal his authorship.
)  unjust and unconstitutional.
Going a stride beyond the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions of 1798, it bluntly and explicitly proposed that the states should nullify the tariffthat is, they should declare it null and void within their borders.
The stage was set for a showdown.
Through Jacksons first term, the nullifiersnullies, they were calledtried strenuously to muster the necessary two-thirds vote for nullification in the South Carolina legislature.
But they were blocked by a determined minority of Unionists, scorned as submission men.
Back in Washington, Congress tipped the balance by passing the new Tariff of 1832.
Though it pared away the worst abominations of 1828, it was still frankly protective and fell far short of meeting southern demands.
Worse yet, to many southerners it had a disquieting air of permanence.
South Carolina was now nerved for drastic action.
Nullifiers and Unionists clashed head-on in the state election of 1832.
Nullies, defiantly wearing palmetto ribbons on their hats to mark their loyalty to the Palmetto State, emerged with more than a two-thirds majority.
The state legislature then called for a special convention.
Several weeks later the delegates, meeting in Columbia, solemnly declared the existing tariff to be null and void within South Carolina.
As a further act of defiance, the convention threatened to take South Carolina out of the C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 Union if Washington attempted to collect the customs duties by force.
Such tactics might have intimidated John Quincy Adams, but Andrew Jackson was the wrong president to stare down.
The cantankerous general was not a die-hard supporter of the tariff, but he would not permit defiance or disunion.
His military instincts rasped, Jackson privately threatened to invade the state and have the nullifiers hanged.
In public he was only slightly less pugnacious.
He dispatched naval and military reinforcements to the Palmetto State, while quietly preparing a sizable army.
He also issued a ringing proclamation against nullification, to which the governor of South Carolina, former senator Robert Y. Hayne, responded with a counterproclamation.
The lines were drawn.
If civil war were to be avoided, one side would have to surrender, or both would have to compromise.
Conciliatory Henry Clay of Kentucky, now in the Senate, stepped forward.
An unforgiving foe of Jackson, he had no desire to see his old enemy win new laurels by crushing the Carolinians and returning with the scalp of Calhoun dangling from his belt.
Although himself a supporter of tariffs, the gallant Kentuckian therefore threw his influence behind a compromise bill that would gradually reduce the Tariff of 1832 by about 10 percent over a period of eight years.
By 1842 the rates would be back at the mildly protective level of 1816.
* The compromise Tariff of 1833 finally squeezed through Congress.
Debate was bitter, with most of the opposition naturally coming from protectionist New England and the middle states.
Calhoun and the South favored the compromise, so it was evident that Jackson would not have to use firearms and rope.
But at the same time, and partly as a facesaving device, Congress passed the Force Bill, known among Carolinians as the Bloody Bill.
It authorized the president to use the army and navy, if necessary, to collect federal tariff duties.
South Carolinians welcomed this opportunity to extricate themselves from a dangerously tight corner without loss of face.
To the consternation of the Calhounites, no other southern states had sprung to their support, though Georgia and Virginia toyed with the idea.
Moreover, an appreciable Unionist minority within South Carolina was gathering guns, organizing militia, and nailing Stars and Stripes to flagpoles.
Faced with civil war within and invasion from without, the Columbia convention met again and repealed the ordinance of nullification.
As a final but futile gesture of fistshaking, it nullified the unnecessary Force Bill and adjourned.
Neither Jackson nor the nullies won a clear-cut  victory in 1833.
Clay was the true hero of the hour, hailed in Charleston and Boston alike for saving the country.
Armed conflict had been avoided, but the fundamental issues had not been resolved.
When next the nullies and the Union clashed, compromise would prove more elusive.
Jacksons Democrats were committed to western expansion, but such expansion necessarily meant confrontation with the current inhabitants of the land.
More than 125,000 Native Americans lived in the forests and prairies east of the Mississippi in the 1820s.
Federal policy toward them varied.
Beginning in the 1790s, the Washington government ostensibly recognized the tribes as separate nations and I never use the word nation in speaking of the United States.
I always use the word union or confederacy.
We are not a nation, but a union, a confederacy of equal and sovereign states.
*For the history of tariff rates, see the Appendix.
agreed to acquire land from them only through formal treaties.
The Indians were shrewd and stubborn negotiators, but this availed them little when Americans routinely violated their own covenants, erasing and redrawing treaty line after treaty line on their maps as white settlement pushed west.
Many white Americans felt respect and admiration for the Indians and believed that the Native Americans could be assimilated into white society.
Much energy therefore was devoted to civilizing and Christianizing the Indians.
The Society for Propagating the Gospel Among Indians was founded in 1787, and many denominations sent missionaries into Indian villages.
In 1793 Congress appropriated $20,000 for the promotion of literacy and agricultural and vocational instruction among the Indians.
Although many tribes violently resisted white encroachment, others followed the path of accommodation.
The Cherokees of Georgia made especially remarkable efforts to learn the ways of the whites.
They gradually abandoned their seminomadic life and adopted a system of settled agriculture and a notion of private property.
Missionaries opened schools among the Cherokees, and the Indian Sequoyah devised a Cherokee alphabet.
In 1808 the Cherokee National Council legislated a written legal code, and in 1827 it adopted a written constitution that provided for executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
Some Cherokees became prosperous cotton planters and even turned to slaveholding.
Nearly thirteen hundred black slaves toiled for their Native American  masters in the Cherokee nation in the 1820s.
For these efforts the Cherokeesalong with the  Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles were numbered by whites among the Five  Civilized Tribes.
All this embrace of civilization apparently was not good enough for whites.
In 1828 the Georgia legislature declared the Cherokee tribal council illegal and asserted its own jurisdiction over Indian affairs and Indian lands.
The Cherokees appealed this move to the Supreme Court, which thrice upheld the rights of the Indians.
But President Jackson, who clearly wanted to open Indian lands to white settleC HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 The Removal of the Southern Tribes to the West ment, refused to recognize the Courts decisions.
In a callous jibe at the Indians defender, Jackson reportedly snapped, John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it.
* Feeling some obligation to rescue this much injured race, Jackson proposed a bodily removal of the remaining eastern tribeschiefly Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminoles beyond the Mississippi.
Emigration was supposed to be voluntary because it would be cruel and unjust to compel the aborigines to abandon the graves of their fathers.
Jackson evidently consoled himself with the belief that the Indians could preserve their native cultures in the wide-open West.
Jacksons policy led to the forced uprooting of more than 100,000 Indians.
In 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, providing for the transplanting of all Indian tribes then resident east of the Mississippi.
Ironically, the heaviest blows fell on the Five Civilized Tribes.
In the ensuing decade, countless Indians died on forced marches to the newly established Indian Territory where they were to be permanently free of white encroachments.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs was established in 1836 to administer relations with Americas original inhabitants.
But as the land-hungry palefaces pushed west faster than anticipated, the governments guarantees went up in smoke.
The permanent frontier lasted about fifteen years.
Suspicious of white intentions from the start, Sauk and Fox braves from Illinois and Wisconsin, ably led by Black Hawk, resisted eviction.
They were bloodily crushed in 1832 by regular troops, including Lieutenant Jefferson Davis of Mississippi, and by volunteers, including Captain Abraham Lincoln of Illinois.
[Indians are] essentially inferior to the AngloSaxon race .
and their disappearance from the human family will be no great loss to the world.
Our conduct toward these people is deeply interesting to our national character.
Our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions.
By persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain, until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names.
Surrounded by the whites with their arts of civilization, which by destroying the resources of the savage doom him to weakness and decay, the fate of the Mohegan, the Narragansett, and the Delaware is fast overtaking the Choctaw, the Cherokee, and the Creek.
That this fate surely awaits them if they remain within the limits of the States does not admit of a doubt.
Humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert such a calamity.
*One hundred sixty years later, in 1992, the state of Georgia formally pardoned the two white missionaries, Samuel Austin Worcester and Elihu Butler, who had figured prominently in the decision Jackson condemned.
They had been convicted of living on Cherokee lands without a license from the state of Georgia.
They served sixteen months at hard labor on a chain gang and later accompanied the Cherokees on the Trail of Tears to  Oklahoma.
One each day, and all are gone.
Looks like maybe all dead before we get to new Indian country, but always we keep marching on.
Women cry and make sad wails.
Children cry, and many men cry, and all look sad when friends die, but they say nothing and just put heads down and keep on toward west.
She [his mother] speak no more; we bury her and go on.
In Florida the Seminole Indians, joined by runaway black slaves, retreated to the swampy Everglades.
For seven years (18351842), they waged a bitter guerrilla war that took the lives of some fifteen hundred soldiers.
The spirit of the Seminoles was broken in 1837, when the American field commander treacherously seized their leader, Osceola, under a flag of truce.
The war dragged on for five more years, but the Seminoles were doomed.
Some fled deeper into the Everglades, where their descendants now live, but about four-fifths of them were moved to present-day Oklahoma, where several thousand of the tribe survive.
President Jackson did not hate all banks and all businesses, but he distrusted monopolistic banking and overbig businesses, as did his followers.
A man of virulent dislikes, he came to share the prejudices of his own West against the moneyed monster known as the Bank of the United States.
What made the bank a monster in Jacksons eyes?
The national government minted gold and silver coins in the mid-nineteenth century but did not issue paper money.
Paper notes were printed by private banks.
Their value fluctuated with the health  of the bank and the amount of money printed, giving private bankers considerable power over the nations economy.
No bank in America had more power than the Bank of the United States.
In many ways the bank acted like a branch of government.
It was the princiC HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 pal depository for the funds of the Washington government and controlled much of the nations gold and silver.
Its notes, unlike those of many smaller banks, were stable in value.
A source of credit and stability, the bank was an important and useful part of the nations expanding economy.
But the Bank of the United States was a private institution, accountable not to the people, but to its elite circle of moneyed investors.
Its president, the brilliant but arrogant Nicholas Biddle, held an immenseand to many unconstitutionalamount of power over the nations financial affairs.
Enemies of the bank dubbed him Czar Nicolas I and called the bank a hydra of corruption, a serpent that grew new heads whenever old ones were cut off.
To some the banks very existence seemed to sin against the egalitarian credo of American democracy.
The conviction formed the deepest source of Jacksons opposition.
The bank also won no friends in the West by foreclosing on many western farms and draining tribute into eastern coffers.
Profit, not public service, was its first priority.
The Bank War erupted in 1832, when Daniel Webster and Henry Clay presented Congress with a bill to renew the Bank of the United States charter.
The charter was not set to expire until 1836, but Clay pushed for renewal four years early to make it an election issue in 1832.
As Jacksons leading rival for the presidency, Clay, with fateful blindness, looked upon the bank issue as a surefire winner.
Clays scheme was to ram a recharter bill through Congress and then send it on to the White House.
If Jackson signed it, he would alienate his worshipful western followers.
If he vetoed it, as seemed certain, he would presumably lose the presidency in the forthcoming election by alienating the wealthy and influential groups in the East.
Clay seems not to have fully realized that the best people were now only a minority and that they generally feared Jackson anyhow.
The recharter bill slid through Congress on greased skids, as planned, but was killed by a scorching veto from Jackson.
The Old Hero declared the monopolistic bank to be unconstitutional.
Of course, the Supreme Court had earlier declared it constitutional in the case of  regarded the executive branch as superior to the judicial branch.
The old general growled privately, The Bank .
is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.
Jacksons veto message reverberated with constitutional consequences.
It not only squashed the bank bill but vastly amplified the power of the presidency.
All previous vetoes had rested almost exclusively on questions of constitutionality.
But though Jackson invoked the Constitution in his bank-veto message, he essentially argued that he was vetoing the bill because he personally found it harmful to the nation.
In effect, he was claiming for the president alone a power equivalent to two-thirds of the votes in Congress.
If the legislative and executive branches were partners in government, he implied, the president was unmistakably the senior partner.
The gods continued to misguide Henry Clay.
Delighted with the financial fallacies of Jacksons message but blind to its political appeal, he arranged to have thousands of copies printed as a campaign document.
The presidents sweeping accusations may indeed have seemed demagogic to the moneyed interests of the East, but they made perfect sense to the common people.
The bank issue was now thrown into the noisy arena of the presidential contest of 1832.
Clay and Jackson were the chief gladiators in the looming electoral combat.
The grizzled old general, who had earlier favored one term for a president  and rotation in office, was easily persuaded by his cronies not to rotate himself out of office.
Presidential power is a heady brew and can be habit-forming.
The ensuing campaign was raucous.
The Old Heros adherents again raised the hickory pole and bellowed, Jackson Forever: Go the Whole Hog.
Admirers of Clay shouted, Freedom and Clay, while his detractors harped on his dueling, gambling, cockfighting, and fast living.
Novel features made the campaign of 1832 especially memorable.
For the first time, a third party entered the fieldthe newborn Anti-Masonic C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 I have always deplored making the Bank a party question, but since the President will have it so, he must pay the penalty of his own rashness.
As to the veto message, I am delighted with it.
It has all the fury of a chained panther biting the bars of his cage.
It is really a manifesto of anarchy .
and my hope is that it will contribute to relieve the country of the domination of these miserable [Jackson] people.
party, which opposed the influence and fearsome secrecy of the Masonic order.
Energized by the mysterious disappearance and probable murder in 1826 of a New Yorker who was threatening to expose the secret rituals of the Masons, the Anti-Masonic party quickly became a potent political force in New York and spread its influence throughout the middle Atlantic and New England states.
The Anti-Masons appealed to long-standing American suspicions of secret societies, which they condemned as citadels of privilege and monopolya note that harmonized with the democratic chorus of the Jacksonians.
But since Jackson himself was a Mason and publicly gloried in his membership, the AntiMasonic party was also an anti-Jackson party.
The Anti-Masons also attracted support from many evangelical Protestant groups seeking to use political power to effect moral and religious reforms, such as prohibiting mail deliveries on Sunday and otherwise keeping the Sabbath holy.
This moral busybodiness was anathema to the Jacksonians, who were generally opposed to all government meddling in social and economic life.
A further novelty of the presidential contest in 1832 was the calling of national nominating conventions (three of them) to name candidates.
The AntiMasons and a group of National Republicans added still another innovation when they adopted formal platforms, publicizing their positions on the issues.
Henry Clay and his overconfident National Republicans enjoyed impressive advantages.
Ample funds flowed into their campaign chest, including $50,000 in life insurance from the Bank of the United States.
Most of the newspaper editors, some of them bought with Biddles bank loans, dipped their pens in acid when they wrote of Jackson.
Yet Jackson, idol of the masses, easily defeated the big-money Kentuckian.
A Jacksonian wave again swept over the West and South, surged into Pennsylvania and New York, and even washed into rockribbed New England.
The popular vote stood at 687,502 to 530,189 for Jackson; the electoral count was a lopsided 219 to 49.
Its charter denied, the Bank of the United States was due to expire in 1836.
But Jackson was not one to let the financial octopus die in peace.
He was convinced that he now had a mandate from the voters for its extermination, and he feared that the slippery Biddle might try to manipulate the bank (as he  did) so as to force its recharter.
Jackson therefore decided in 1833 to bury the bank for good by removing federal deposits from its vaults.
He proposed depositing no more funds with Biddle and gradually shrinking existing deposits by using them to defray the day-to-day expenses of the government.
By slowly siphoning off the governments funds, he would bleed the bank dry and ensure its demise.
Removing the deposits involved nasty complications.
Even the presidents closest advisers opposed this seemingly unnecessary, possibly unconstitutional, and certainly vindictive policy.
Jackson, his dander up, was forced to reshuffle his cabinet twice before he could find a secretary of the Treasury who would bend to his iron will.
A desperate Biddle called in his banks loans, evidently hoping to illustrate the banks importance by producing a minor financial crisis.
A number of wobblier banks were driven to the wall by Biddles Panic, but Jacksons resolution was firm.
If anything, the vengeful conduct of the dying monster seemed to justify the earlier accusations of its adversaries.
But the death of the Bank of the United States left a financial vacuum in the American economy and kicked off a lurching cycle of booms and busts.
Surplus federal funds were placed in several dozen state institutionsthe so-called pet banks, chosen for their pro-Jackson sympathies.
Without a sober central bank in control, the pet banks and smaller wildcat banksfly-by-night operations that often consisted of little more than a few chairs and a suitcase full of printed notesflooded the country with paper money.
Jackson tried to rein in the runaway economy in 1836, the year Biddles bank breathed its last.
Wildcat currency had become so unreliable, especially in the West, that Jackson authorized the Treasury to issue a Specie Circulara decree that required all public lands to be purchased with hard, or metallic, money.
This drastic step slammed the brakes on the speculative boom, a neck-snapping change of direction that contributed to a financial panic and crash in 1837.
But by then Jackson had retired to his Nashville home, hailed as the hero of his age.
His successor would have to deal with the damage.
New political parties were gelling as the 1830s lengthened.
As early as 1828, the Democratic-Republicans of Jackson had unashamedly adopted the oncetainted name Democrats.
Jacksons opponents, fuming at his ironfisted exercise of presidential power, condemned him as King Andrew I and began to coalesce as the Whigsa name deliberately chosen to recollect eighteenth-century British and Revolutionary American opposition to the monarchy.
The Whig party contained so many diverse elements that it was mocked at first as an organized incompatibility.
Hatred of Jackson and his executive usurpation was its only apparent cement in its formative days.
The Whigs first emerged as an identifiable group in the Senate, where Clay, Webster, and Calhoun joined forces in 1834 to pass a motion censuring Jackson for his single-handed removal of federal deposits from the Bank of the United States.
Thereafter, the Whigs rapidly evolved into a potent national political force by attracting other groups alienated by Jackson: supporters of Clays American System, southern states righters offended by Jacksons stand on nullification, the larger northern industrialists and merchants, and eventually many of the evangelical Protestants associated with the Anti-Masonic party.
Whigs thought of themselves as conservatives, yet they were progressive in their support of active government programs and reforms.
Instead of boundless territorial acquisition, they called for internal improvements like canals, railroads, and telegraph lines, and they supported institutions like prisons, asylums, and pubic schools.
The Whigs welcomed the market economy, drawing support from manufacturers in the North, planters in the South, and merchants and bankers in all sections.
But they were not simply a party of wealthy fat cats, however dearly the Democrats wanted to paint them as such.
By absorbing the Anti-Masonic party, the Whigs blunted much of the Democratic appeal to the common man.
The egalitarian anti-Masons portrayed Jackson, and particularly his New York successor Martin Van Buren, as imperious aristocrats.
This turned Jacksonian rhetoric on its head: now the Whigs claimed to be the defenders of the common man and declared the Democrats the party of cronyism and corruption.
The smooth-tongued and keen-witted secretary of state, Martin Van Buren of New York, was Jacksons choice for appointment as his successor in 1836.
The hollow-cheeked Jackson, now nearing seventy, was too old and ailing to consider a third term.
But he was not loath to try to serve a third term through Van Buren, something of a yes man.
Leaving nothing to chance, Jackson carefully rigged the nominating convention and rammed his favorite down the C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 throats of the delegates.
Van Buren was supported by the Jacksonites without wild enthusiasm, even though he had promised to tread generally in the military-booted footsteps of his predecessor.
As the election neared, the still-ramshackle organization of the Whigs showed in their inability to nominate a single presidential candidate.
Their long-shot strategy was instead to run several prominent favorite sons, each with a different regional appeal, and hope to scatter the vote so that no candidate would win a majority.
The deadlock would then have to be broken by the House of Representatives, where the Whigs might have a chance.
With Henry Clay rudely elbowed aside, the leading Whig favorite son was heavy-jawed General William Henry Harrison of Ohio, hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe (see p.
230).
The finespun schemes of the Whigs availed nothing, however.
Van Buren, the dapper Little Magician, squirmed into office by the close popular vote of 765,483 to 739,795, but by the comfortable margin of 170 to 124 votes (for all the Whigs combined) in the Electoral College.
Martin Van Buren, eighth president, was the first to be born under the American flag.
Short and slender, bland and bald, the adroit little New Yorker has been described as a first-class second-rate man.
An accomplished strategist and spoilsmanthe wizard of Albanyhe was also a statesman of wide experience in both legislative and administrative Political humor can take more forms than the commonly seen caustic cartoon.
Occasionally, historians stumble upon other examples, such as this fake bank note.
A jibe at Andrew Jacksons money policies, it appeared in New York in 1837 after Jacksons insistence on shutting down the Bank of the United States resulted in the suspension of specie payments.
The clever creator of this satiric bank note for six cents left little doubt about the worthlessness of the note or Jacksons responsibility for it.
The six cents payable by the Humbug Glory Bankwhose symbols were a donkey and a Hickory Leaf (for Old Hickory)were redeemable in mint drops or Glory at cost.
The banks cashier was Cunning Reuben, possibly an anti-Semitic allusion to usurious Jewish bankers.
Can you identify other ways in which this document takes aim at Jacksons banking policies?
What symbols did the notes creator assume the public would comprehend?
life.
In intelligence, education, and training, he was above the average of the presidents since Jackson.
The myth of his mediocrity sprouted mostly from a series of misfortunes over which he had no control.
From the outset the new president labored under severe handicaps.
As a machine-made candidate, he incurred the resentment of many Democratsthose who objected to having a bastard politician smuggled into office beneath the tails of the old generals military coat.
Jackson, the master showman, had been a dynamic type of executive whose administration had resounded with furious quarrels and cracked heads.
Mild-mannered Martin Van Buren seemed to rattle about in the military boots of his testy predecessor.
The people felt let down.
Inheriting Andrew Jacksons mantle without his popularity, Van Buren also inherited the expresidents numerous and vengeful enemies.
Van Burens four years overflowed with toil and trouble.
A rebellion in Canada in 1837 stirred up ugly incidents along the northern frontier and threatened to trigger war with Britain.
The presidents attempt to play a neutral game led to the wail, Woe to Martin Van Buren!
The antislavery agitators in the North were in full cry.
Among other grievances, they were condemning the prospective annexation of Texas (see p.
280).
Worst of all, Jackson bequeathed to Van Buren the makings of a searing depression.
Much of Van Burens energy had to be devoted to the purely negative task of battling the panic, and there were not enough rabbits in the Little Magicians tall silk hat.
Hard times ordinarily blight the reputation of a president, and Van Buren was no exception.
The panic of 1837 was a symptom of the financial sickness of the times.
Its basic cause was rampant speculation prompted by a mania of get-richquickism.
Gamblers in western lands were doing a land-office business on borrowed capital, much  of it in the shaky currency of wildcat banks.
The speculative craze spread to canals, roads, railroads, and slaves.
But speculation alone did not cause the crash.
Jacksonian finance, including the Bank War and the Specie Circular, gave an additional jolt to an already teetering structure.
Failures of wheat crops, ravaged by the Hessian fly, deepened the distress.
Grain prices were forced so high that mobs in New York City, three weeks before Van Buren took the oath, stormed warehouses and broke open flour barrels.
The panic really began before Jackson left office, but its full fury burst about Van Burens bewildered head.
Financial stringency abroad likewise endangered Americas economic house of cards.
Late in 1836 the failure of two prominent British banks  created tremors, and these in turn caused British investors to call in foreign loans.
The resulting pinch in the United States, combined with other setbacks, heralded the beginning of the panic.
Europes economic distresses have often become Americas disC HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 tresses, for every major American financial panic has been affected by conditions overseas.
Hardship was acute and widespread.
American banks collapsed by the hundreds, including some pet banks, which carried down with them several millions in government funds.
Commodity prices drooped, sales of public lands fell off, and customs revenues dried to a rivulet.
Factories closed their doors, and unemployed workers milled in the streets.
The Whigs came forward with proposals for active government remedies for the economys ills.
They called for the expansion of bank credit, higher tariffs, and subsidies for internal improvements.
But Van Buren, shackled by the Jacksonian philosophy of keeping the governments paws off the economy, spurned all such ideas.
The beleaguered Van Buren tried to apply vintage Jacksonian medicine to the ailing economy through his controversial Divorce Bill.
Convinced that some of the financial fever was fed by the injection of federal funds into private banks, he championed the principle of divorcing the government from banking altogether.
By establishing a so-called independent treasury, the government could lock its surplus money in vaults in several of the larger cities.
Government funds would thus be safe, but they would also be denied to the banking system  as reserves, thereby shriveling available credit resources.
Van Burens divorce scheme was never highly popular.
His fellow Democrats, many of whom longed for the risky but lush days of the pet banks, supported it only lukewarmly.
The Whigs condemned it, primarily because it squelched their hopes for a revived Bank of the United States.
After a prolonged struggle, the Independent Treasury Bill passed Congress in 1840.
Repealed the next year by the victorious Whigs, the scheme was reenacted by the triumphant Democrats in 1846 and then continued until merged with the Federal Reserve System in the next century.
Americans, greedy for land, continued to covet the vast expanse of Texas, which the United States had abandoned to Spain when acquiring Florida in 1819.
The Spanish authorities wanted to populate this virtually unpeopled area, but before they could carry through their contemplated plans, the Mexicans won their independence.
A new regime in Mexico City thereupon concluded arrangements in 1823 for granting a huge tract of land to Stephen Austin, with the understanding that he would bring into Texas three hundred American families.
Immigrants were to be of the established Roman Catholic The savings-bank also sustained a most grievous run yesterday.
They paid 375 depositors $81,000.
The press was awful; the hour for closing the bank is six oclock, but they did not get through the paying of those who were in at that time till nine oclock.
I was there with the other trustees and witnessed the madness of the people women nearly pressed to death, and the stoutest men could scarcely sustain themselves; but they held on as with a deaths grip upon the evidences of their claims, and, exhausted as they were with the pressure, they had strength to cry Pay!
Pay!
The greatest annoyance I was subjected to  in travelling was in exchanging money.
It is impossible to describe the wretched state  of the currencywhich is all bills issued by private individuals; companies; cities and states; almost all of which are bankrupt;  or what amounts to the same thing, they cannot redeem their issues.
And these do not pass out of the state, or frequently, out of the city in which they are issued.
faith and upon settlement were to become properly Mexicanized.
These two stipulations were largely ignored.
Hardy Texas pioneers remained Americans at heart, resenting the trammels imposed by a foreign government.
They were especially annoyed by the presence of Mexican soldiers, many of whom were ragged ex-convicts.
Energetic and prolific, Texan-Americans numbered about thirty thousand by 1835 (see Makers of America: Mexican or Texican?
278279).
Most of them were law-abiding, God-fearing people, but some of them had left the States only one or two jumps ahead of the sheriff.
G.T.T.
(Gone to Texas) became current descriptive slang.
Among the adventurers were Davy Crockett, the famous rifleman, and Jim Bowie, the presumed inventor of the murderous knife that bears his name.
Bowies blade was widely known in the Southwest as the genuine Arkansas toothpick.
A distinguished latecomer and leader was an ex-governor of Tennessee, Sam Houston.
His life had been temporarily shattered in 1829 when his bride of a few weeks left him, and he took up transient residence with the Arkansas Indians, who dubbed him Big Drunk.
He subsequently took the pledge of temperance.
The pioneer individualists who came to Texas were not easy to push around.
Friction rapidly increased between Mexicans and Texans over issues such as slavery, immigration, and local rights.
Slavery was a particularly touchy topic.
Mexico emancipated its slaves in 1830 and prohibited the further importation of slaves into Texas, as well as further colonization by troublesome Americans.
The Texans refused to honor these decrees.
They kept their slaves in bondage, and new American settlers kept bringing more slaves into Texas.
When Stephen Austin went to Mexico City in 1833 to negotiate these differences with the Mexican government, the dictator Santa Anna clapped him in jail for eight months.
The explosion finally came in 1835, when Santa Anna wiped out all local rights and started to raise an army to suppress the upstart Texans.
Early in 1836 the Texans declared their independence, unfurled their Lone Star flag, and named  Sam Houston commander in chief.
Santa Anna, at the head of about six thousand men, swept ferociously into Texas.
Trapping a band of nearly two hundred pugnacious Texans at the Alamo in San Antonio, he wiped them out to a man after a thirteen-day siege.
Their commander, Colonel W. B. Travis, had declared, I shall never surrender nor retreat.
Victory or Death.
A short time later, a band of about four hundred surrounded and defeated American volunteers, having thrown down their arms at Goliad, were butchered as pirates.
All these operations further delayed the Mexican advance and galvanized American opposition.
Slain heroes like Jim Bowie and Davy Crockett, well-known in life, became legendary in death.
C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 Texan war criesRemember the Alamo!
Remember Goliad!
and Death to Santa Anna!swept up into the United States.
Scores of vengeful Americans seized their rifles and rushed to the aid of relatives, friends, and compatriots.
General Sam Houstons small army retreated to the east, luring Santa Anna to San Jacinto, near the site of the city that now bears Houstons name.
The Mexicans numbered about thirteen hundred men, the Texans about nine hundred.
Suddenly, on April 21, 1836, Houston turned.
Taking full advantage of the Mexican siesta, the Texans wiped out the pursuing force and captured Santa Anna, who was found cowering in the tall grass near the battlefield.
Confronted with thirsty bowie knives, the quaking dictator was speedily induced to sign two treaties.
By their terms he agreed to withdraw Mexican troops and to recognize the Rio Grande as the extreme southwestern boundary of Texas.
When released, he repudiated the agreement as illegal because it was extorted under duress.
These events put the U.S.
government in a sticky situation.
The Texans, though courageous, could hardly have won their independence without the help in men and supplies from their American cousins.
The Washington government, as the Mexicans bitterly complained, had a solemn obligation under international law to enforce its leaky neutrality statutes.
But American public opinion, overwhelmingly favorable to the Texans, openly nullified oses Austin, born a Connecticut Yankee in 1761, was determined to be Spanishif thats what it took to acquire cheap land and freedom from pesky laws.
In 1798 he tramped into untracked Missouri, still part of Spanish Louisiana, and pledged his allegiance to the king of Spain.
He was not pleased when the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 restored him to American citizenship.
In 1820, with his old Spanish passport in his saddlebag, he rode into Spanish Texas and asked for permission to establish a colony of three hundred families.
Austins request posed a dilemma for the Texas governor.
The Spanish authorities had repeatedly stamped out the bands of American horse thieves and squatters who periodically splashed across the Red and Sabine Rivers from the United States into Spanish territory.
Yet the Spanish had lured only some three thousand of their own settlers into Texas during their three centuries of rule.
If the land were ever to be wrestled from the Indians and civilized, maybe Austins plan could do it.
Hoping that this band of the right sort of Americans might prevent the further encroachment of the buckskinned border ruffians, the governor reluctantly agreed to Austins proposal.
Upon Moses Austins death in 1821, the task of realizing his dream fell to his twenty-seven-year-old son, Stephen.
I bid an everlasting farewell to my native country, Stephen Austin said, and he crossed into Texas on July 15, 1821, determined to fulfill rigidly all the duties and obligations of a Mexican citizen (Mexico declared its independence from Spain early in 1821 and finalized its agreement with Austin in 1823).
Soon he learned fluent Spanish and was signing his name as Don Estvan F. Austin.
In his new colony between the Brazos and Colorado Rivers, he allowed no drunkard, no gambler, no profane swearer, no idlerand sternly enforced these rules.
Not only did he banish several families as undesirables, but he ordered the public flogging of unwanted interlopers.
Austin fell just three families short of recruiting the three hundred households that his father had contracted to bring to Texas.
The original settlers were still dubbed the Old Three Hundred, the Texas equivalent of New Englands Mayflower Pilgrims or the First Families of Virginia.
Mostly Scots-Irish southerners from the trans-Appalachian frontier, the Old Three Hundred were cultured folk by frontier standards; all but four of them were  literate.
Other settlers followed, from Europe as well as America.
Within ten years the Anglos (many of them French and German) outnumbered the Mexican residents, or  evolved a distinctive Texican culture.
The wideranging horse patrols organized to attack Indian camps became the Texas Rangers; Samuel Maverick, whose unbranded calves roamed the limitless prairies, left his surname as a label for rebellious loners who refused to run with the herd; and Jared Groce, an Alabama planter whose caravan of fifty covered wagons and one hundred slaves arrived in 1822, etched the original image of the larger-thanlife, big-time Texas operator.
The original Anglo-Texans brought with them the old Scots-Irish frontiersmans hostility to authority.
They ignored Mexican laws and officials, including restrictions against owning or importing slaves.
When the Mexican government tried to impose its will on the Anglo-Texans in the 1830s, they took up their guns.
Like the American revolutionaries of the 1770s, who at first demanded only the rights of Englishmen, the Texans began by asking simply for Mexican recognition of their rights as guaranteed by the Mexican constitution of 1824.
But bloodshed at the Alamo in 1836, like that at Lexington in 1775, transformed protest into rebellion.
Texas layand still liesalong the frontier where Hispanic and Anglo-American cultures met, mingled, and clashed.
In part the Texas Revolution was a contest between those two cultures.
But it was also a contest about philosophies of government, pitting liberal frontier ideals of freedom against the conservative concept of centralized control.
Stephen Austin sincerely tried to Mexicanize himself and his followersuntil the Mexican government grew too arbitrary and authoritarian.
And not all the Texas revolutionaries were Anglos.
Many ished defending the Alamo.
Among the fifty-nine signers of the Texas declaration of independence were several Hispanics, including the  Antonio Navarro and Francisco Ruiz.
Lorenzo de Zavala, an ardent Mexican liberal who had long resisted the centralizing tendencies of Mexicos dominant political party, was designated vice president of the Texas Republics interim government in 1836.
Like the Austins, these  had sought in Texas an escape from overbearing governmental authority.
Their role in the revolution underscores the fact that the uprising was a struggle between defenders of local rights and the agents of central authority as much as it was a fight between Anglo and Mexican cultures.
the existing legislation.
The federal authorities were powerless to act, and on the day before he left office in 1837, President Jackson even extended the right hand of recognition to the Lone Star Republic, led by his old comrade in arms against the Indians, Sam Houston.
Many Texans wanted not just recognition of their independence but outright union with the United States.
What nation in its right mind, they reasoned, would refuse so lavish a dowry?
The radiant Texas bride, officially petitioning for annexation in 1837, presented herself for marriage.
But the expectant groom, Uncle Sam, was jerked back by the black hand of the slavery issue.
Antislavery crusaders in the North were opposing annexation with increasing vehemence; they contended that the whole scheme was merely a conspiracy cooked up by the southern slavocracy to bring new slave pens into the Union.
At first glance a slavery plot charge seemed plausible.
Most of the early settlers in Texas, as well as American volunteers during the revolution, had come from the states of the South and Southwest.
But scholars have concluded that the settlement of Texas was merely the normal and inexorable march of the westward movement.
Most of the immigrants came from the South and Southwest simply because these states were closer.
The explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy.
Yet the fact remained that many Texans were slaveholders, and admitting Texas to the Union inescapably meant enlarging American slavery.
Martin Van Buren was renominated by the Democrats in 1840, albeit without terrific enthusiasm.
The party had no acceptable alternative to what the Whigs called Martin Van Ruin.
The Whigs, hungering for the spoils of office, scented victory in the breeze.
Pangs of the panic were still being felt, and voters blamed their woes on the party in power.
Learning from their mistake in 1836, the Whigs united behind one candidate, Ohios William Henry Harrison.
He was not their ablest statesmanthat would have been Daniel Webster or Henry Claybut he was believed to be their ablest vote-getter.
The aging hero, nearly sixty-eight when the campaign ended, was known for his successes against Indians and the British at the Battles of Tippecanoe (1811) and the Thames (1813).
Harrisons views on current issues were only vaguely known.
Old Tippecanoe was nominated primarily because he was issueless and enemylessa tested C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 The Texas Revolution, 18351836 General Houstons strategy was to retreat and use defense in depth.
His line of supply from the United States was shortened as Santa Annas lengthened.
The Mexicans were forced to bring up supplies by land because the Texas navy controlled the sea.
This force consisted of only four small ships, but it was big enough to do the job.
R E P U B L I C   O F   T E X A S L O U I S I A N A A R K A N S A S M E X I C O Disputed area Santa Anna's attack route Houston's strategic retreat Texan victory Mexican victory recipe for electoral success that still appeals today.
John Tyler of Virginia, an afterthought, was selected as his vice-presidential running mate.
The Whigs, eager to avoid offense, published no official platform, hoping to sweep their hero into office with a frothy huzza-for-Harrison campaign reminiscent of Jacksons triumph in 1828.
A dullwitted Democratic editor played directly into Whig hands.
Stupidly insulting the West, he lampooned Harrison as an impoverished old farmer who should be content with a pension, a log cabin, and a barrel of hard ciderthe poor westerners champagne.
Whigs gleefully adopted honest hard cider and the sturdy log cabin as symbols of their campaign.
Harrisonites portrayed their hero as the poor Farmer of North Bend, who had been called from his cabin and his plow to drive corrupt Jackson spoilsmen from the presidential palace.
They denounced  Van Buren as a supercilious aristocrat, a simpering dandy who wore corsets and ate French food from golden plates.
As a jeering Whig campaign song  proclaimed, The Whig campaign was a masterpiece of inane hoopla.
Log cabins were dished up in every conceivable form.
Bawling Whigs, stimulated by fortified cider, rolled huge inflated balls from village to village and state to stateballs that represented the snowballing majority for Tippecanoe, and Tyler too.
In truth, Harrison was not lowborn, but from one of the FFVs (First Families of Virginia).
He was not poverty-stricken.
He did not live in a one-room log cabin, but rather in a sixteen-room mansion on a three-thousand-acre farm.
He did not swill down gallons of hard cider (he evidently preferred whiskey).
And he did not plow his fields with his own huge paws.
But such details had not mattered when General Jackson rode to victory, and they did not matter now.
The Democrats that hurrahed Jackson into the White House in 1828 now discovered to their chagrin that whooping it up for a backwoods westerner was a game two could play.
Harrison won by the surprisingly close margin of 1,274,624 to 1,127,781 popular votes, but by an overwhelming electoral margin of 234 to 60.
With hardly a real issue debated, though with hard times blighting the incumbents fortunes, Van Buren was washed out of Washington on a wave of apple juice.
The hardciderites had apparently received a mandate to tear down the White House and erect a log cabin.
The election of 1840 conclusively demonstrated two major changes in American politics since the Era of Good Feelings.
The first was the triumph of a popC HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 ulist democratic style.
Democracy had been something of a taint in the days of the lordly Federalists.
Martha Washington, the first First Lady, was shocked after a presidential reception to find a greasy smear on the wallpaperleft there, she was sure, by an uninvited filthy democrat.
But by the 1840s, aristocracy was the taint, and democracy was respectable.
Politicians were now forced to unbend and curry favor with the voting masses.
Lucky indeed was the aspiring office seeker who could boast of birth in a log cabin.
In 1840 Daniel Webster publicly apologized for not being able to claim so humble a birthplace, though he quickly added that his brothers could.
Hopelessly handicapped was the candidate who appeared to be too clean, too well dressed, too grammatical, too highbrowishly intellectual.
In truth, most high political offices continued to be filled by leading citizens.
But now these wealthy and prominent men had to forsake all social pretensions and cultivate the common touch if they hoped to win elections.
Snobbish bigwigs, unhappy over the change, sneered at coonskin congressmen and at the newly enfranchised bipeds of the forest.
To them the tyranny of King Numbers was no less offensive than that of King George.
But these critics protested in vain.
The common man was at last moving to the center of the national political stage: the sturdy American who donned plain trousers rather than silver-buckled knee breeches, who sported a plain haircut and a coonskin  cap rather than a powdered wig, and who wore no mans collar, often not even one of his own.
Instead of the old divine right of kings, America was now bowing to the divine right of the people.
The second dramatic change resulting from the 1840 election was the formation of a vigorous and durable two-party system.
The Jeffersonians of an earlier day had been so successful in absorbing the programs of their Federalist opponents that a fullblown two-party system had never truly emerged in the subsequent Era of Good Feelings.
The idea had prevailed that parties of any sort smacked of conspiracy and faction and were injurious to the health of the body politic in a virtuous republic.
By 1840 political parties had fully come of age, a lasting legacy of Andrew Jacksons tenaciousness.
Both national parties, the Democrats and the Whigs grew out of the rich soil of Jeffersonian republicanism, and each laid claim to different aspects of the republican inheritance.
Jacksonian Democrats glorified the liberty of the individual and were fiercely on guard against the inroads of privilege into government.
Whigs trumpeted the natural harmony of society and the value of community, and were willing to use government to realize their objectives.
Whigs also berated those leadersand they considered Jackson to be onewhose appeals to self-interest fostered conflict among individuals, classes, or sections.
Democrats clung to states rights and federal restraint in social and economic affairs as their basic doctrines.
Whigs tended to favor a renewed national bank, protective tariffs, internal improvements, public schools, and, increasingly, moral reforms such as the prohibition of liquor and eventually the abolition of slavery.
The two parties were thus separated by real differences of philosophy and policy.
But they also  had much in common.
Both were mass-based, C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 The people ought to inquire [of political candidates]are you opposed to a national bank; are you in favor of a strict construction of the Federal and State Constitutions; are you in favor of rotation in office; do you subscribe to the republican rule that the people are the sovereign power, the officers their agents, and that upon all national or general subjects, as well as local, they  have a right to instruct their agents and representatives, and they are bound to obey or resign; in short, are they true Republicans agreeable to the true Jeffersonian creed?
Vesey slave conspiracy in Charleston, South Carolina Mexico opens Texas to American settlers Lack of electoral majority for presidency throws election into the House of Representatives House elects John Quincy Adams president Tariff of 1828 (Tariff of Abominations) Jackson elected president Indian Removal Act Bank WarJackson vetoes bill to recharter Bank of the United States Tariff of 1832 Black Hawk War Jackson defeats Clay for presidency South Carolina nullification crisis Compromise Tariff of 1833 Jackson removes federal deposits from Bank of the United States Bank of the United States expires Specie Circular issued Bureau of Indian Affairs established Battle of the Alamo Battle of San Jacinto Texas wins independence from Mexico Van Buren elected president Seminole Indians defeated and eventually removed from Florida United States recognizes Texas Republic but refuses annexation Panic of 1837 Cherokee Indians removed on  Trail of Tears Independent Treasury established Harrison defeats Van Buren for presidency catchall parties that tried deliberately to mobilize as many voters as possible for their cause.
Although it is true that Democrats tended to be more humble folk and Whigs more prosperous, both parties nevertheless commanded the loyalties of all kinds of Americans, from all social classes and in all sections.
The social diversity of the two parties had important implications.
It fostered horse-trading compromises  assuming extreme or radical positions.
By the same token, the geographical diversity of the two parties retarded the emergence of purely sectional political partiestemporarily suppressing, through compromise, the ultimately uncompromisable issue of slavery.
When the two-party system began to creak in the 1850s, the Union was mortally imperiled.
ristocratic, eastern-born historians of the nineteenth century damned Jackson as a backwoods barbarian.
They criticized Jacksonianism as democracy run riotan irresponsible, ill-bred outburst that overturned the electoral system and wrecked the national financial structure.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, however, another generation of historians came to the fore, many of whom grew up in the Midwest and rejected the elitist views of their predecessors.
Frederick Jackson Turner and his disciples saw the western frontier as the fount of democratic virtue, and they hailed Jackson as a true hero sprung from the forests of the West to protect the will of the people against the monied interests, akin to the progressive reformers of their own day.
In his famous 1893 essay, The Significance of the Frontier in American History, Turner argued that the United States owed the survival of its democratic tradition to the rise of the West, not to its roots in the more conservative, aristocratic East.
When Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., published  sonianism shifted dramatically.
Although he shared the Turnerians admiration for Jackson the democrat, Schlesinger cast the Jacksonian era not as a sectional conflict, but as a class conflict between poor farmers, laborers, and noncapitalists on the one hand, and the business communityepitomized by the Second Bank of the United Stateson the other.
In Schlesingers eyes, the Jacksonians justifiably attacked the bank as an institution dangerously independent of democratic oversight.
The political mobilization of the urban working classes in support of Jackson particularly attracted Schlesingers interest.
Soon after Schlesingers book appeared, the  discussion again shifted ground and entirely  new interpretations of Jacksonianism emerged.
Richard Hofstadter argued in  sonian democracy was not a rejection of capitalism, as Schlesinger insisted, but rather the effort of aspiring entrepreneurs to secure laissez-faire policies that would serve their own interests against their entrenched, and monopolistic, eastern competitors.
In  portrayed the Jacksonians as conservative capitalists, torn between fierce commercial ambitions and a desire to cling to the virtues of the agrarian past.
In an effort to resolve this contradiction, he argued, they lashed out at scapegoats like the national bank, blaming it for the very changes their own economic energies had unleashed.
Lee Benson contended in the political conflicts of the Jacksonian era did not correspond so much to class divisions as to different ethnic and religious splits within American society.
Using new quantitative methods of analysis, Benson found no consistent demarcationsin class, occupation, or regionbetween the Jacksonians and their rivals.
Local and cultural issues such as temperance and religion were far more influential in shaping political life than the national financial questions analyzed by previous historians.
In the 1980s Sean Wilentz and other scholars began to resurrect some of Schlesingers argument about the importance of class to Jacksonianism.
In C HAPTER 13 The Rise of a Mass Democracy, 18241840 Jacksonian politics could not be properly understood without reference to the changing national economy.
Artisans watched in horror as new manufacturing techniques put many of them out of business and replaced their craftsmanship with the unskilled hands of wage laborers.
To these anxious small producers, Americas infatuation with impersonal institutions and large-scale employers threatened the very existence of a republic founded on  the principle that its citizens were virtuously selfsufficient.
Thus Jacksons attack on the Bank of the United States symbolized the antagonism these individuals felt toward the emergent capitalist economy and earned him their strong allegiance.
This interpretation is conspicuous in Charles Sellerss  tion: what was the relationship between American democracy and free-market capitalism?
They are often assumed to be twins, born from the common parentage of freedom and opportunity, reared in the wide-open young republic, and mutually supporting each other ever since.
But perhaps, Sellers  suggested, they were really adversaries, with Jacksonians inventing mass democracy in order to hold capitalist expansion in check.
Yet if this interpretation is correct, what explains the phenomenal growth of the capitalist economy in the years immediately following the triumphs of Jacksonianism?
Further research and analysis are needed to sort out the varied commitments of the mix of Americans who spiritedly identified their own destinies  with Andrew Jackson, as well as the intended and  unintended consequences that resulted from  their support.
For further reading, see page A9 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Forging the National Economy  17901860 R ALPH W ALDO E MERSON , 1866 T he new nation went bounding into the nineteenth century in a burst of movement.
New England Yankees, Pennsylvania farmers, and southern yeomen all pushed west in search of cheap land and prodigious opportunity, soon to be joined by vast numbers of immigrants from Europe, who also made their way to the countrys fast-growing cities.
But not only people were in motion.
Newly invented machinery quickened the cultivation of crops and the manufacturing of goods, while workers found themselves laboring under new, more demanding expectations for their pace of work.
Better roads, faster steamboats, farther-reaching canals, and tentacle-stretching railroads all helped move people, raw materials, and manufactured goods from coast to coast and Gulf to Great Lakes by the midnineteenth century.
The momentum gave rise to a more dynamic, market-oriented, national economy.
The rise of Andrew Jackson, the first president from beyond the Appalachian Mountains, exemplified the inexorable westward march of the American people.
The West, with its raw frontier, was the most typically American part of America.
As Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in 1844, Europe stretches to the Alleghenies; America lies  beyond.
The Republic was young, and so were the people  as late as 1850, half of Americans were under the age of thirty.
They were also restless and energetic, seemingly always on the move, and always westward.
One tall tale of the frontier described chickens that voluntarily crossed their legs every spring, waiting to be tied for the annual move west.
By 1840 the demographic center of the American population map had crossed the Alleghenies.
By the eve of the Civil War, it had marched across the Ohio River.
Legend portrays an army of muscular axmen triumphantly carving civilization out of the western woods.
But in reality life was downright grim for most pioneer families.
Poorly fed, ill-clad, housed in hastily erected shanties (Abraham Lincolns family lived for a year in a three-sided lean-to made of brush and sticks), they were perpetual victims of disease, depression, and premature death.
Above all, unbearable loneliness haunted them, especially the women, who were often cut off from human contact, even their neighbors, for days or even weeks, while confined to the cramped orbit of a dark cabin in a secluded clearing.
Breakdowns and even madness were all too frequently the opportunities that the frontier offered to pioneer women.
Frontier life could be tough and crude for men as well.
No-holds-barred wrestling, which permitted such niceties as the biting off of noses and the gouging out of eyes, was a popular entertainment.
Pioneering Americans, marooned by geography, were often ill informed, superstitious, provincial, and fiercely individualistic.
Ralph Waldo Emersons popular lecture-essay Self-Reliance struck a deeply responsive chord.
Popular literature of the period abounded with portraits of unique, isolated figures like James Fenimore Coopers heroic Natty Bumppo and Herman Melvilles restless Captain Ahabjust as Jacksonian politics aimed to emancipate the lone-wolf, enterprising businessperson.
Yet even in this heyday of rugged individualism, there were important exceptions.
Pioneers, in tasks clearly beyond their own individual resources, would call upon their neighbors for logrolling and barn raising and upon their governments for help in building internal improvements.
The westward movement also molded the physical environment.
Pioneers in a hurry often exhausted the land in the tobacco regions and then pushed on, leaving behind barren and rain-gutted fields.
In the Kentucky bottomlands, cane as high as fifteen feet posed a seemingly insurmountable barrier to the plow.
But settlers soon discovered that when the cane was burned off, European bluegrass thrived in the charred canefields.
Kentucky bluegrass, as it was somewhat inaccurately called, made ideal pasC HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 ture for livestockand lured thousands more American homesteaders into Kentucky.
The American West felt the pressure of civilization in additional ways.
By the 1820s American furtrappers were setting their traplines all over the vast Rocky Mountain region.
The fur-trapping empire was based on the rendezvous system.
Each summer, traders ventured from St.
Louis to a verdant Rocky Mountain valley, made camp, and waited for the trappers and Indians to arrive with beaver pelts to swap for manufactured goods from the East.
This trade thrived for some two decades; by the time beaver hats had gone out of fashion, the hapless beaver had all but disappeared from the region.
Trade in buffalo robes also flourished, leading eventually to the virtually total annihilation of the massive bison herds that once blanketed the western prairies.
Still farther west, on the California coast, other traders bought up prodigious quantities of sea-otter pelts, driving the once-bountiful otters to the point of nearextinction.
Some historians have called this aggressive and often heedless exploitation of the Wests natural bounty ecological imperialism.
Yet Americans in this period also revered nature and admired its beauty.
Indeed the spirit of nationalism fed the growing appreciation of the uniqueness of the American wilderness.
Searching for the United States distinctive characteristics in this nation-conscious age, many observers found the wild, unspoiled character of the land, especially in the West, to be among the young nations defining attributes.
Other countries might have impressive mountains or sparkling rivers, but none had the pristine, natural beauty of America, unspoiled by human hands and reminiscent of a time before the dawn of civilization.
This attitude toward wilderness became in time a kind of national mystique, inspiring literature and painting, and eventually kindling a powerful conservation movement.
George Catlin, a painter and student of Native American life, was among the first Americans to advocate the preservation of nature as a deliberate national policy.
In 1832 he observed Sioux Indians in South Dakota recklessly slaughtering buffalo in order to trade the animals tongues for the white mans whiskey.
Appalled at this spectacle and fearing for the preservation of Indians and buffalo alike, Catlin proposed the creation of a national park.
His idea later bore fruit with the creation of a national park system, beginning with Yellowstone Park in 1872.
As the American people moved west, they also  multiplied at an amazing rate.
By midcentury the population was still doubling approximately every twenty-five years, as in fertile colonial days.
By 1860 the original thirteen states had more than doubled in number: thirty-three stars graced the American flag.
The United States was the fourth most populous nation in the western world, exceeded only by three European countriesRussia, France, and Austria.
Urban growth continued explosively.
In 1790 there had been only two American cities that could boast populations of twenty thousand or more souls: Philadelphia and New York.
By 1860 there were forty-three, and about three hundred other places claimed over five thousand inhabitants apiece.
New York was the metropolis; New Orleans, the Queen of the South; and Chicago, the swaggering lord of the Midwest, destined to be hog butcher for the world.
Such overrapid urbanization unfortunately brought undesirable by-products.
It intensified the problems of smelly slums, feeble street lighting, C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 1790 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 19 19 19 18 18 17 16 14 3,172,000 4,306,000 5,862,000 7,867,000 10,537,000 14,196,000 19,553,000 26,922,000 757,000 1,002,000 1,378,000 1,772,000 2,329,000 2,874,000 3,639,000 4,521,000 3,929,000 5,308,000 7,240,000 9,639,000 12,866,000 17,070,000 23,192,000 31,443,000 10M  20M 30M 40M Population Increase, Including Slaves and Indians, 17901860  Increasing European immigration and the closing of the slave trade gradually whitened the population beginning in 1820.
This trend continued into the early twentieth century.
N.H.
MASS.
CONN.
IND.
R.I.
N.Y.
Pittsburgh Boston N.J.
DEL.
New York Washington MD.
N.C.
S.C.
ALA.
TENN.
MISS.
ARK.
MINN.
IOWA MICH.
ILL.
Cleveland Indianapolis Cincinnati Louisville W. VA.
WIS.
OHIO 39  39  1940 1960 1980 1990 1860 1880 1900 1920 1790 1800 1820 1840 St.
Louis 1970 Chicago Westward Movement of Center of Population, 17901990  The triangles indicate the points at which a map of the United States weighted for the population of the country in a given year would balance.
Note the remarkable equilibrium of the north-south pull from 1790 to about 1940, and the strong spurt west and south thereafter.
The 1980 census revealed that the nations center of population had at last moved west of the Mississippi River.
The map also shows the slowing of the westward movement between 1890 and 1940 the period of heaviest immigration from Europe, which ended up mainly in East Coast cities.
inadequate policing, impure water, foul sewage, ravenous rats, and improper garbage disposal.
Hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many city streets as late as the 1840s.
Boston in 1823  pioneered a sewer system, and New York in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped-in water supply.
The city thus unknowingly eliminated  the breeding places of many disease-carrying  mosquitoes.
A continuing high birthrate accounted for most of the increase in population, but by the 1840s the tides of immigration were adding hundreds of thousands more.
Before this decade immigrants had been flowing in at a rate of sixty thousand a year, but suddenly the influx tripled in the 1840s and then quadrupled in the 1850s.
During these two feverish decades, over a million and a half Irish, and nearly as many Germans, swarmed down the gangplanks.
Why did they come?
The immigrants came partly because Europe seemed to be running out of room.
The population of the Old World more than doubled in the nineteenth century, and Europe began to generate a A lot of people come over here who were well off in Germany but were enticed to leave their fatherland by boastful and imprudent letters from their friends or children and thought they could become rich in America.
This deceives a lot of people, since what can they do here?
If they stay in the city they  can only earn their bread at hard and unaccustomed labor.
If they want to live in the country and dont have enough money to buy a piece of land that is cleared and has a house then they have to settle in the wild bush and have to work very hard to clear the trees out of the way so they can sow and plant.
But people who are healthy, strong, and hard-working do pretty well.
18311840 207,381 152,454 18411850 780,719 434,626 18511860 914,119 951,667 18611870 435,778 787,468 18711880 436,871 718,182 18811890 655,482 1,452,970 18911900 388,416 505,152   TOTAL 3,818,766 5,000,519 seething pool of apparently surplus people.
They were displaced and footloose in their homelands before they felt the tug of the American magnet.
Indeed at least as many people moved about  Europe as crossed the Atlantic.
America benefited from these people-churning changes but did not set them all in motion.
Nor was the United States the sole beneficiary of the process: of the nearly 60 million people who abandoned Europe in the century after 1840, about 25 million went somewhere other than the United States.
Yet America still beckoned most strongly to the struggling masses of Europe, and the majority of migrants headed for the land of freedom and opportunity.
There was freedom from aristocratic caste and state church; there was abundant opportunity to secure broad acres and better ones condition.
Much-read letters sent home by immigrants America lettersoften described in glowing terms the richer life: low taxes, no compulsory military service, and three meat meals a day.
The introduction of transoceanic steamships also meant that  the immigrants could come speedily, in a matter of ten or twelve days instead of ten or twelve weeks.
On board, they were still jammed into unsanitary quarters, thus suffering an appalling death rate from infectious diseases, but the nightmare was more endurable because it was shorter.
Ireland, already groaning under the heavy hand of British overlords, was prostrated in the mid-1840s.
A terrible rot attacked the potato crop, on which the people had become dangerously dependent, and about one-fourth of them were swept away by disease and hunger.
Starved bodies were found dead by the roadsides with grass in their mouths.
All told, about 2 million perished.
Tens of thousands of destitute souls, fleeing the Land of Famine for the Land of Plenty, flocked to America in the Black Forties.
Irelands great export has been population, and the Irish take their place beside the Jews and the Africans as a dispersed  people (see Makers of America: The Irish,  pp.
294295).
These uprooted newcomerstoo poor to move west and buy the necessary land, livestock, and equipmentswarmed into the larger seaboard cities.
Noteworthy were Boston and particularly New York, which rapidly became the largest Irish city in the world.
Before many decades had passed, more people of Hibernian blood lived in America than on the ould sod of Erins Isle.
The luckless Irish immigrants received no redcarpet treatment.
Forced to live in squalor, they were rudely crammed into the already-vile slums.
They were scorned by the older American stock, especially proper Protestant Bostonians, who regarded the scruffy Catholic arrivals as a social menace.
Barely literate Biddies (Bridgets) took jobs as kitchen maids.
Broad-shouldered Paddies (Patricks) were pushed into pick-and-shovel drudgery on canals and railroads, where thousands left their bones as victims of disease and accidental explosions.
It was said that an Irishman lay buried under every railroad tie.
As wage-depressing competitors for jobs, the Irish were hated by native workers.
No Irish Need Apply was a sign comC HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 This is a good place and a good country, but there is one thing thats ruining this place.
The emigrants have not money enough to take them to the interior of the country, which obliges them to remain here in New York and the like places, which causes the less demand for labor and also the great reduction in wages.
For this reason I would advise no one to come to America that would not have some money after landing here that would enable them to go west in case they would get no work to do here.
But any man or woman without a family are fools that would not venture and come to this plentiful country where no man or woman ever hungered or ever will.
I can assure you there are dangers upon dangers, but my friends, have courage and come all together courageously and bid adieu to that lovely place, the land of our birth.
monly posted at factory gates and was often abbreviated to NINA.
The Irish, for similar reasons, fiercely resented the blacks, with whom they shared societys basement.
Race riots between black and Irish dockworkers flared up in several port cities, and the Irish were generally cool to the abolitionist cause.
The friendless famine Irish were forced to fend for themselves.
The Ancient Order of Hibernians, a semisecret society founded in Ireland to fight rapacious landlords, served in America as a benevolent society, aiding the downtrodden.
It also helped to spawn the Molly Maguires, a shadowy Irish miners union that rocked the Pennsylvania coal districts in the 1860s and 1870s.
The Irish tended to remain in low-skill occupations but gradually improved their lot, usually by acquiring modest amounts of property.
The education of children was cut short as families struggled to save money to purchase a home.
But for humble Irish peasants, cruelly cast out of their homeland, property ownership counted as a grand success.
Politics quickly attracted these gregarious Gaelic newcomers.
They soon began to gain control of powerful city machines, notably New Yorks Tammany Hall, and reaped the patronage rewards.
Before long, beguilingly brogued Irishmen dominated police departments in many big cities, where they now drove the Paddy wagons that had once carted their brawling forebears to jail.
American politicians made haste to cultivate the Irish vote, especially in the politically potent state of New York.
Irish hatred of the British lost nothing in the transatlantic transplanting.
As the Irish-Americans increased in numbernearly 2 million arrived between 1830 and 1860officials in Washington glimpsed political gold in those emerald green hills.
Politicians often found it politically profitable to fire verbal volleys at Londona process vulgarly known as twisting the British lions tail.
The influx of refugees from Germany between 1830 and 1860 was hardly less spectacular than that  from Ireland.
During these troubled years, over a million and a half Germans stepped onto American soil (see Makers of America: The Germans,  pp.
298299).
The bulk of them were uprooted farmers, displaced by crop failures and other hardships.
But a strong sprinkling were liberal political refugees.
Saddened by the collapse of the democratic revolutions of 1848, they had decided to leave  the autocratic fatherland and flee to Americathe brightest hope of democracy.
Germanys loss was Americas gain.
Zealous German liberals like the lanky and public-spirited Carl Schurz, a relentless foe of slavery and public corruption, contributed richly to the elevation of American political life.
Unlike the Irish, many of the Germanic newcomers possessed a modest amount of material goods.
Most of them pushed out to the lush lands of the Middle West, notably Wisconsin, where they settled and established model farms.
Like the Irish, they formed an influential body of voters whom American politicians shamelessly wooed.
But the Germans were less potent politically because their strength was more widely scattered.
The hand of Germans in shaping American life was widely felt in still other ways.
The Conestoga wagon, the Kentucky rifle, and the Christmas tree were all German contributions to American culture.
Germans had fled from the militarism and wars of Europe and consequently came to be a bulwark of isolationist sentiment in the upper Mississippi Valley.
Better educated on the whole than the stumpgrubbing Americans, they warmly supported public schools, including their  garden).
They likewise did much to stimulate art and music.
As outspoken champions of freedom, they became relentless enemies of slavery during the fevered years before the Civil War.
I have seen the Indian in his forests and the Negro in his chains, and thought, as I contemplated their pitiable condition, that I saw the very extreme of human wretchedness; but I did not then know the condition of unfortunate Ireland.
or a generation, from 1793 to 1815, war raged across Europe.
Ruinous as it was on the Continent, the fighting brought unprecedented prosperity to the long-suffering landsmen of Ireland, groaning since the twelfth century under the yoke of English rule.
For as Europes fields lay fallow, irrigated only by the blood of its farmers, Ireland fed the hungry armies that ravened for food as well as territory.
Irish farmers planted every available acre, interspersing the lowly potato amongst their fields of grain.
With prices for food products ever mounting, tenant farmers reaped a temporary respite from their perpetual struggle to remain on the land.
Most landlords were satisfied by the prosperity and so relaxed their pressure on tenants; others, stymied by the absence of British police forces that had been stripped of manpower to fight in Europe, had little means to enforce eviction notices.
But the peace that brought solace to battlescarred Europe changed all this.
After 1815 warinflated wheat prices plummeted by half.
Hardpressed landlords resolved to leave vast fields unplanted.
Assisted now by a strengthened British constabulary, they vowed to sweep the pesky peasants from the retired acreage.
Many of those forced to leave sought work in England; some went to America.
Then in 1845 a blight that ravaged the potato crop sounded the final knell for the Irish peasantry.
The resultant famine spread desolation throughout the island.
In five years, more than a million people died.
Another million sailed for America.
Of the emigrants, most were young and literate in English, the majority under thirty-five years old.
Families typically pooled money to send strong young sons to the New World, where they would earn wages to pay the fares for those who waited  at home.
These famine Irish mostly remained in the port cities of the Northeast, abandoning the farmers life for the dingy congestion of the urban metropolis.
The disembarking Irish were poorly prepared for urban life.
They found progress up the economic ladder painfully slow.
Their work as domestic servants or construction laborers was dull and arduous, and mortality rates were astoundingly high.
Escape from the potato famine hardly guaranteed a long life to an Irish-American; a gray-bearded Irishman was a rare sight in nineteenth-century America.
Most of the new arrivals toiled as day laborers.
A fortunate few owned boardinghouses or saloons, where their dispirited countrymen sought solace in the bottle.
For Irish-born women, opportunities were still scarcer; they worked mainly as domestic servants.
But it was their Roman Catholicism, more even than their penury or their perceived fondness for alcohol, that earned the Irish the distrust and resentment of their native-born, Protestant American neighbors.
The cornerstone of social and religious life for Irish immigrants was the parish.
Worries about safeguarding their childrens faith inspired the construction of parish schools, financed by the pennies of struggling working-class Irish parents.
If Irelands green fields scarcely equipped her sons and daughters for the scrap and scramble of economic life in Americas cities, life in the Old Country nevertheless had instilled in them an aptitude for politics.
Irish-Catholic resistance against centuries of English-Anglican domination had instructed many Old Country Irish in the ways of mass politics.
That political experience readied them for the boss system of the political machines in Americas northeastern cities.
The bosss local representatives met each newcomer soon after  he landed in America.
Asking only for votes, the machine supplied coal in wintertime, food, and help with the law.
Irish voters soon became a bulwark of the Democratic party, reliably supporting the party of Jefferson and Jackson in cities like New York and Boston.
As Irish-Americans like New Yorks Honest John Kelly themselves became bosses, white-collar jobs in government service opened up to the Irish.
They became building inspectors, aldermen, and even policemenan astonishing irony for a people driven from their homeland by the nightsticks and bayonets of the British police.
Yet the Germansoften dubbed damned Dutchmenwere occasionally regarded with suspicion by their old-stock American neighbors.
Seeking to preserve their language and culture, they sometimes settled in compact colonies and kept aloof from the surrounding community.
Accustomed to the Continental Sunday and uncurbed by Puritan tradition, they made merry on the Sabbath and drank huge quantities of an amber beverage called  in America to their coming.
Their Old World drinking habits, like those of the Irish, spurred advocates of temperance in the use of alcohol to redouble their reform efforts.
The invasion by this so-called immigrant rabble in the 1840s and 1850s inflamed the prejudices of American nativists.
They feared that these foreign hordes would outbreed, outvote, and overwhelm the old native stock.
Not only did the newcomers take jobs from native Americans, but the bulk of the displaced Irish were Roman Catholics, as were a substantial minority of the Germans.
The Church of Rome was still widely regarded by many old-line Americans as a foreign church; convents were commonly referred to as popish brothels.
Roman Catholics were now on the move.
Seeking to protect their children from Protestant indoctrination in the public schools, they began in the 1840s to construct an entirely separate Catholic educational systeman enormously expensive undertaking for a poor immigrant community, but one that revealed the strength of its religious commitment.
They had formed a negligible minority during colonial days, and their numbers had increased gradually.
But with the enormous influx of the Irish and Germans in the 1840s and 1850s, the Catholics became a powerful religious group.
In 1840 they had ranked fifth, behind the Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, and Congregationalists.
By 1850, with some  1.8 million communicants, they had bounded into first placea position they have never lost.
Older-stock Americans were alarmed by these mounting figures.
They professed to believe that in due time the alien riffraff would establish the Catholic Church at the expense of Protestantism and would introduce popish idols.
The noisier American nativists rallied for political action.
In 1849 they formed the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, which soon developed into  the formidable American, or Know-Nothing, partya name derived from its secretiveness.
Nativists agitated for rigid restrictions on immigration and naturalization and for laws authorizing the deportation of alien paupers.
They also promoted a lurid literature of exposure, much of it pure fiction.
The authors, sometimes posing as escaped nuns, described the shocking sins they imagined the cloisters concealed, including the secret burial of babies.
One of these sensational booksMaria Monks  Even uglier was occasional mass violence.
As early as 1834, a Catholic convent near Boston was burned by a howling mob, and in ensuing years a few scattered attacks fell upon Catholic schools and C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860  and to this end, native-born citizens should be selected for all state, federal, or municipal offices of government employment, in preference to naturalized citizens.
churches.
The most frightful flare-up occurred during 1844 in Philadelphia, where the Irish Catholics fought back against the threats of the nativists.
The City of Brotherly Love did not quiet down until two Catholic churches had been burned and some thirteen citizens had been killed and fifty wounded in several days of fighting.
These outbursts of intolerance, though infrequent and generally localized in the larger cities, remain an unfortunate blot on the record of Americas treatment of minority groups.
Immigrants were undeniably making America a more pluralistic societyone of the most ethnically and racially varied in the history of the worldand perhaps it was small wonder that cultural clashes would occur.
Why, in fact, were such episodes not even more frequent and more violent?
Part of the answer lies in the robustness of the American economy.
The vigorous growth of the economy in these years both attracted immigrants in the first place and ensured that, once arrived, they could claim their share of American wealth without jeopardizing the wealth of others.
Their hands and brains, in fact, helped fuel economic expansion.
Immigrants and the American economy, in short, needed one another.
Without the newcomers, a preponderantly agricultural United States might well have been condemned to watch in envy as the Industrial Revolution swept through nineteenth-century Europe.
A group of gifted British inventors, beginning about 1750, perfected a series of machines for the mass production of textiles.
This enslavement of steam multiplied the power of human muscles some tenthousandfold and ushered in the modern factory systemand with it, the so-called Industrial Revolution.
It was accompanied by a no-less-spectacular transformation in agricultural production and in the methods of transportation and communication.
etween 1820 and 1920, a sea of Germans lapped at Americas shores and seeped into its very heartland.
Their numbers surpassed those of any other immigrant group, even the prolific and oftendetested Irish.
Yet this Germanic flood, unlike its Gaelic equivalent, stirred little panic in the hearts  of native-born Americans because the Germans largely stayed to themselves, far from the madding crowds and nativist fears of northeastern cities.
They prospered with astonishing ease, building towns in Wisconsin, agricultural colonies in Texas, and religious communities in Pennsylvania.
They added a decidedly Germanic flavor to the heady brew of reform and community building that so animated antebellum America.
These Germans actually hailed from many different Old World lands, because there was no unified nation of Germany until 1871, when the ruthless and crafty Prussian Otto von Bismarck assembled the German state out of a mosaic of independent principalities, kingdoms, and duchies.
Until that time, Germans came to America  as Prussians, Bavarians, Hessians, Rhinelanders, Pomeranians, and Westphalians.
They arrived at  different times and for many different reasons.
Some, particularly the so-called Forty-Eightersthe refugees from the abortive democratic revolution of 1848hungered for the democracy they had failed to win in Germany.
Others, particularly Jews, Pietists, and Anabaptist groups like the Amish and the Mennonites, coveted religious freedom.
And they came not only to America.
Like the Italians later, many Germans sought a new life in Brazil, Argentina, and Chile.
But the largest number ventured into the United States.
Typical German immigrants arrived with fatter purses than their Irish counterparts.
Small landowners or independent artisans in their native countries, they did not have to settle for bottomrung industrial employment in the grimy factories of the Northeast and instead could afford to push on to the open spaces of the American West.
In Wisconsin these immigrants found a home away from home, a place with a climate, soil, and geography much like central Europes.
Milwaukee, a crude frontier town before the Germans arrival, became the German Athens.
It boasted a German theater, German beer gardens, a German volunteer fire company, and a German-English academy.
In distant Texas, German settlements like New Braunfels and Friedrichsburg flourished.
When the famous landscape architect and writer Frederick Law Olmsted stumbled upon these prairie outposts of Teutonic culture in 1857, he was shocked to be welcomed by a figure in a blue flannel shirt and pendant beard, quoting Tacitus.
These German colonies in the frontier Southwest mixed high European elegance with Texas ruggedness.
Olmsted described a visit to a German household where the settlers drank coffee in tin cups upon Dresden saucers and sat upon barrels for seats, to hear a Beethoven symphony on the grand piano.
These Germanic colonizers of Americas heartland also formed religious communities, none more distinctive or durable than the Amish settlements of Pennsylvania, Indiana, and Ohio.
The Amish took their name from their founder and leader, the Swiss Anabaptist Jacob Amman.
Like other Anabaptist groups, they shunned extravagance and reserved baptism for adults, repudiating the tradition of infant baptism practiced by most Europeans.
For this they were persecuted, even imprisoned, in Europe.
Seeking escape from their oppression, some five hundred Amish ventured to Pennsylvania in the 1700s, followed by three thousand in the years from 1815 to 1865.
In America they formed enduring religious communitiesisolated enclaves where they could shield themselves from the corruption and the conveniences of the modern world.
To this day the  German-speaking Amish still travel in horse-drawn carriages and farm without heavy machinery.
No electric lights brighten the darkness that nightly envelops their tidy farmhouses; no ringing telephones punctuate the reverent tranquility of their mealtime prayer; no ornaments relieve the austere simplicity of their black garments.
The Amish remain a stalwart, traditional community in a rootless, turbulent society, a living testament to the  religious ferment and social experiments of the antebellum era.
The factory system gradually spread from Britainthe worlds workshopto other lands.
It took a generation or so to reach western Europe, and then the United States.
Why was the youthful American Republic, destined to be an industrial giant, so slow to embrace the machine?
For one thing, virgin soil in America was cheap.
Land-starved descendants of land-starved peasants were not going to coop themselves up in smelly factories when they might till their own acres in Gods fresh air and sunlight.
Labor was therefore generally scarce, and enough nimble hands to operate the machines were hard to finduntil immigrants began to pour ashore in the 1840s.
Money for capital investment, moreover, was not plentiful in pioneering America.
Raw materials lay undeveloped, undiscovered, or unsuspected.
The Republic was one day to become the worlds leading coal producer, but much of the coal burned in colonial times was imported all the way from Britain.
Just as labor was scarce, so were consumers.
The young country at first lacked a domestic market large enough to make factory-scale manufacturing profitable.
Long-established British factories, which provided cutthroat competition, posed another problem.
Their superiority was attested by the fact that a few unscrupulous Yankee manufacturers, out to make a dishonest dollar, stamped their own products with fake English trademarks.
The British also enjoyed a monopoly of the textile machinery, whose secrets they were anxious to hide from foreign competitors.
Parliament enacted laws, in harmony with the mercantile system, forbidding the export of the machines or the emigration of mechanics able to reproduce them.
Although a number of small manufacturing enterprises existed in the early Republic, the future industrial colossus was still snoring.
Not until well past the middle of the nineteenth century did the value of the output of the factories exceed that of the farms.
Samuel Slater has been acclaimed the Father of the Factory System in America, and seldom can the paternity of a movement more properly be ascribed to one person.
A skilled British mechanic of twentyone, he was attracted by bounties being offered to British workers familiar with the textile machines.
After memorizing the plans for the machinery, he escaped in disguise to America, where he won the backing of Moses Brown, a Quaker capitalist in Rhode Island.
Laboriously reconstructing the essential apparatus with the aid of a blacksmith and a carpenter, he put into operation in 1791 the first efficient American machinery for spinning cotton thread.
The ravenous mechanism was now ready, but where was the cotton fiber?
Handpicking one pound of lint from three pounds of seed was a full days work for one slave, and this process was so expensive that cotton cloth was relatively rare.
Another mechanical genius, Massachusettsborn Eli Whitney, now made his mark.
After graduC HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 Historians of technology examine not only the documentary evidence of plans and patents left behind by inventors, but surviving machines themselves.
In 1845, Elias Howe, a twenty-six-year-old apprentice to a Boston watchmaker invented a sewing machine that could make two hundred and fifty stitches a minute, five times what the swiftest hand sewer could do.
A year later Howe received a patent for his invention, but because the handcranked machine could only stitch straight seams for a short distance before requiring resetting, it had limited commercial appeal.
Howe took his sewing machine abroad where he worked with British manufacturers to improve it, and then returned to America and combined his patent with those of other inventors, including Isaac M. Singer.
Hundreds of thousands of sewing machines were produced beginning in the 1850s for commercial manufacturing of clothing, books, shoes, and many other products and also for home use.
The sewing machine became the first widely advertised consumer product.
Due to its high cost, the Singer company introduced an installment buying plan, which helped to place a sewing machine  in most middle-class households.
Why was the sewing machine able to find eager customers in commercial workshops and home sewing rooms alike?
How might the sewing machine have changed other aspects of American life, such as work patterns, clothing styles, and retail selling?
What other advances in technology might have been necessary for the invention of the sewing machine?
ating from Yale, he journeyed to Georgia to serve as a private tutor while preparing for the law.
There he was told that the poverty of the South would be relieved if someone could only invent a workable device for separating the seed from the short-staple cotton fiber.
Within ten days, in 1793, he built a crude machine called the cotton gin (short for en handpicking process.
Few machines have ever wrought so wondrous a change.
The gin affected not only the history of America but that of the world.
Almost overnight  the raising of cotton became highly profitable,  and the South was tied hand and foot to the throne  of King Cotton.
Human bondage had been dying  out, but the insatiable demand for cotton reriveted the chains on the limbs of the downtrodden southern blacks.
South and North both prospered.
Slave-driving planters cleared more acres for cotton, pushing the Cotton Kingdom westward off the depleted tidewater plains, over the Piedmont, and onto the black loam bottomlands of Alabama and Mississippi.
Humming gins poured out avalanches of snowy fiber for the spindles of the Yankee machines, though for decades to come the mills of Britain bought the lions share of southern cotton.
The American phase of the Industrial Revolution, which first blossomed in cotton textiles, was well on its way.
Factories at first flourished most actively in New England, though they branched out into the more populous areas of New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
The South, increasingly wedded to the  production of cotton, could boast of comparatively little manufacturing.
Its capital was bound up in slaves; its local consumers for the most part were desperately poor.
New England was singularly favored as an industrial center for several reasons.
Its narrow belt of stony soil discouraged farming and hence made manufacturing more attractive than elsewhere.
A relatively dense population provided labor and accessible markets; shipping brought in capital; and snug seaports made easy the import of raw materials and the export of the finished products.
Finally, the rapid riversnotably the Merrimack in Massachusettsprovided abundant water power to turn the cogs of the machines.
By 1860 more than 400 million pounds of southern cotton poured annually into the gaping maws of over a thousand mills, mostly in New England.
Americas factories spread slowly until about 1807, when there began the fateful sequence of the embargo, nonintercourse, and the War of 1812.
Stern necessity dictated the manufacture of substitutes for normal imports, while the stoppage of European commerce was temporarily ruinous to Yankee shipping.
Both capital and labor were driven from the waves onto the factory floor, as New EngC HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 land, in the striking phrase of John Randolph, exchanged the trident for the distaff.
Generous bounties were offered by local authorities for homegrown goods, Buy American and Wear American became popular slogans, and patriotism prompted the wearing of baggy homespun garments.
President Madison donned some at his inauguration, where he was said to have been a walking argument for the better processing of native wool.
But the manufacturing boomlet broke abruptly with the peace of Ghent in 1815.
British competitors unloaded their dammed-up surpluses at ruinously low prices, and American newspapers were so full of British advertisements for goods on credit that little space was left for news.
In one Rhode Island district, all 150 mills were forced to close their doors, except the original Slater plant.
Responding to pained outcries, Congress provided some relief when it passed the mildly protective Tariff of 1816among the earliest political contests to control the shape of the economy.
As the factory system flourished, it embraced numerous other industries in addition to textiles.
Prominent among them was the manufacturing of firearms, and here the wizardly Eli Whitney again appeared with an extraordinary contribution.
Frustrated in his earlier efforts to monopolize the cotton gin, he turned to the mass production of muskets for the U.S.
Army.
Up to this time, each part of a firearm had been hand-tooled, and if the trigger of one broke, the trigger of another might or might not fit.
About 1798 Whitney seized upon the idea of having machines make each part, so that all the triggers, for example, would be as much alike as the successive imprints of a copperplate engraving.
Journeying to Washington, he reportedly dismantled ten of his new muskets in the presence of skeptical officials, scrambled the parts together, and then quickly reassembled ten different muskets.
The principle of interchangeable parts was widely adopted by 1850, and it ultimately became the basis of modern mass-production, assemblyline methods.
It gave to the North the vast industrial plant that ensured military preponderance over the South.
Ironically, the Yankee Eli Whitney, by perfecting the cotton gin, gave slavery a renewed lease on life, and perhaps made inevitable the Civil War.
At the same time, by popularizing the principle of interchangeable parts, Whitney helped factories to flourish in the North, giving the Union a decided advantage when that showdown came.
The operatives work thirteen hours a day in the summer time, and from daylight to dark in the winter.
At half past four in the morning the factory bell rings, and at five the girls must be in the mills.
So fatigued .
are numbers of girls that they go to bed soon after receiving their evening meal, and endeavor by a comparatively long sleep to resuscitate their weakened frames for the toil of the coming day.
The sewing machine, invented by Elias Howe in 1846 and perfected by Isaac Singer, gave another strong boost to northern industrialization.
The sewing machine became the foundation of the ready-made clothing industry, which took root about the time of the Civil War.
It drove many a seamstress from the shelter of the private home to the factory, where, like a human robot, she tended the clattering mechanisms.
Each momentous new invention seemed to stimulate still more imaginative inventions.
For the decade ending in 1800, only 306 patents were registered in Washington; but the decade ending in 1860 saw the amazing total of 28,000.
Yet in 1838 the clerk of the Patent Office had resigned in despair, complaining that all worthwhile inventions had been discovered.
Technical advances spurred equally important changes in the form and legal status of business organizations.
The principle of limited liability aided the concentration of capital by permitting the individual investor, in cases of legal claims or bankruptcy, to risk no more than his own share of the corporations stock.
Fifteen Boston families formed one of the earliest investment capital companies, the Boston Associates.
They eventually dominated the textile, railroad, insurance, and banking business of Massachusetts.
Laws of free incorporation, first passed in New York in 1848, meant that businessmen could create corporations without applying for individual charters from the legislature.
Samuel F. B. Morses telegraph was among the inventions that tightened the sinews of an increasingly complex business world.
A distinguished but poverty-stricken portrait painter, Morse finally secured from Congress, to the accompaniment of the usual jeers, an appropriation of $30,000 to support his experiment with talking wires.
In 1844 Morse strung a wire forty miles from Washington to Baltimore and tapped out the historic message, What hath God wrought?
The invention brought fame and fortune to Morse, as he put distantly separated people in almost instant communication with one another.
By the eve of the Civil War, a web of singing wires spanned the continent, revolutionizing news gathering, diplomacy, and finance.
One ugly outgrowth of the factory system was an increasingly acute labor problem.
Hitherto manufacturing had been done in the home, or in the small shop, where the master craftsman and his apprentice, rubbing elbows at the same bench, could maintain an intimate and friendly relationship.
The industrial revolution submerged this personal association in the impersonal ownership of stuffy factories in spindle cities.
Around these, like tumors, the slumlike hovels of the wage slaves tended to cluster.
Clearly the early factory system did not shower its benefits evenly on all.
While many owners waxed fat, workingpeople often wasted away at their workbenches.
Hours were long, wages were low, and meals were skimpy and hastily gulped.
Workers were forced to toil in unsanitary buildings that were poorly ventilated, lighted, and heated.
They were forbidden by law to form labor unions to raise wages, for such cooperative activity was regarded as a criminal conspiracy.
Not surprisingly, only twentyfour recorded strikes occurred before 1835.
Especially vulnerable to exploitation were child workers.
In 1820 half the nations industrial toilers were children under ten years of age.
Victims of factory labor, many children were mentally blighted, emotionally starved, physically stunted, and even brutally whipped in special whipping rooms.
In Samuel Slaters mill of 1791, the first machine tenders were seven boys and two girls, all under twelve years of age.
By contrast, the lot of most adult wage workers improved markedly in the 1820s and 1830s.
In the C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 The patent system secured to the inventor for a limited time exclusive use of his invention, and thereby added the fuel of interest to the fire of genius in the discovery and production of new and useful things.
full flush of Jacksonian democracy, many of the states granted the laboring man the vote.
Brandishing the ballot, he first strove to lighten his burden through workingmens parties.
Eventually many workers gave their loyalty to the Democratic party of Andrew Jackson, whose attack on the Bank of the United States and against all forms of privilege reflected their anxieties about the emerging capitalist economy.
In addition to such goals as the tenhour day, higher wages, and tolerable working conditions, they demanded public education for their children and an end to the inhuman practice of imprisonment for debt.
Employers, abhorring the rise of the rabble in politics, fought the ten-hour day to the last ditch.
They argued that reduced hours would lessen production, increase costs, and demoralize the workers.
Laborers would have so much leisure time that the Devil would lead them into mischief.
A redletter gain was at length registered for labor in 1840, when President Van Buren established the ten-hour day for federal employees on public works.
In ensuing years a number of states gradually fell into line by reducing the hours of workingpeople.
Day laborers at last learned that their strongest weapon was to lay down their tools, even at the risk of prosecution under the law.
Dozens of strikes erupted in the 1830s and 1840s, most of them for higher wages, some for the ten-hour day, and a few for such unusual goals as the right to smoke on the job.
The workers usually lost more strikes than they won, for the employer could resort to such tactics as the importing of strikebreakersoften derisively called scabs or rats, and often fresh off the boat from the Old World.
Labor long raised its voice against the unrestricted inpouring of wagedepressing and union-busting immigrant workers.
Labors early and painful efforts at organization had netted some 300,000 trade unionists by 1830.
But such encouraging gains were dashed on the rocks of hard times following the severe depression of 1837.
As unemployment spread, union membership shriveled.
Yet toilers won a promising legal victory in 1842.
The supreme court of Massachusetts ruled in the case of  labor unions were not illegal conspiracies, provided that their methods were honorable and peaceful.
This enlightened decision did not legalize the strike overnight throughout the country, but it was a significant signpost of the times.
Trade unions still had a rocky row to hoe, stretching ahead for about a century, before they could meet management on relatively even terms.
Women were also sucked into the clanging mechanism of factory production.
Farm women and girls had an important place in the preindustrial economy, spinning yarn, weaving cloth, and making candles, soap, butter, and cheese.
New factories such as the textile mills of New England undermined these activities, cranking out manufactured goods much faster than they could be made by hand at home.
Yet these same factories offered employment to the very young women whose work they were displacing.
Factory jobs promised greater economic independence for women, as well as the means to buy the manufactured products of the new market economy.
Factory girls typically toiled six days a week, earning a pittance for dreary, limb-numbing, earsplitting stints of twelve or thirteen hoursfrom dark to dark.
The Boston Associates, nonetheless, proudly pointed to their textile mill at Lowell, Massachusetts, as a showplace factory.
The workers were virtually all New England farm girls, carefully supervised on and off the job by watchful matrons.
Escorted regularly to church from their company boardinghouses and forbidden to form unions, they had few opportunities to share dissatisfactions over their grueling working conditions.
But factory jobs of any kind were still unusual  for women.
Opportunities for women to be economically self-supporting were scarce and consisted mainly of nursing, domestic service, and especially teaching.
The dedicated Catharine Beecher, unmarried daughter of a famous preacher and sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe, tirelessly urged women to enter the teaching profession.
She eventually succeeded beyond her dreams, as men left teaching for other lines of work and schoolteaching became a thoroughly feminized occupation.
Other work opportunities for women beckoned in household service.
Perhaps one white family in ten employed servants at midcentury, most of whom were poor white, immigrant, or black women.
About 10 percent of white women were working for pay outside their C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 The Mayor, who acts with vigour and firmness, ordered out the troops, who are now on duty with loaded arms.
These measures have restored order for the present, but I fear the elements of disorder are at work; the bands of Irish and other foreigners, instigated by the mischievous councils of the trades-union and other combinations of discontented men, are acquiring strength and importance which  will ere long be difficult to quell.
You wish to know minutely of our hours of labor.
We go in [to the mill] at five oclock; at seven we come out to breakfast; at half-past seven we return to our work, and stay until half-past twelve.
At one, or quarter-past one four months in the year, we return to our work, and stay until seven at night.
Then the evening is all our own, which is more than some laboring girls can say, who think nothing is more tedious than a factory life.
I am here, among strangersa factory girl yes, a factory girl; that name which is thought so degrading by many, though, in truth, I neither see nor feel its degradation.
But here I am.
I toil day after day in the noisy mill.
When the bell calls I must go: and must I always stay here, and spend my days within these pent-up walls, with this ceaseless din my only music?
own homes in 1850, and estimates are that about 20 percent of all women had been employed at some time prior to marriage.
The vast majority of workingwomen were single.
Upon marriage, they left their paying jobs and took up their new work (without wages) as wives and mothers.
In the home they were enshrined in a cult of domesticity, a widespread cultural creed that glorified the customary functions of the homemaker.
From their pedestal, married women commanded immense moral power, and they increasingly made decisions that altered the character of the family itself.
Womens changing roles and the spreading  Industrial Revolution brought some important changes in the life of the nineteenth-century homethe traditional womens sphere.
Love, not parental arrangement, more and more frequently determined the choice of a spouseyet parents often retained the power of veto.
Families thus became more closely knit and affectionate, providing the emotional refuge that made the threatening impersonality of big-city industrialism tolerable to many people.
Most striking, families grew smaller.
The average household had nearly six members at the end of the eighteenth century but fewer than five members a century later.
The fertility rate, or number of births among women age fourteen to forty-five, dropped sharply among white women in the years after the Revolution and, in the course of the nineteenth century as a whole, fell by half.
Birth control was still a taboo topic for polite conversation, and contraceptive technology was primitive, but clearly some form of family limitation was being practiced quietly and effectively in countless families, rural and urban alike.
Women undoubtedly played a large partperhaps the leading partin decisions to have fewer children.
This newly assertive role for women has been called domestic feminism, because it signified the growing power and independence of women, even while they remained wrapped in the cult of domesticity.
Smaller families, in turn, meant child-centered families, since where children are fewer, parents can lavish more care on them individually.
European visitors to the United States in the nineteenth century often complained about the unruly behavior of American brats.
But though American parents may have increasingly spared the rod, they did not spoil their children.
Lessons were enforced by  punishments other than the hickory stick.
When  the daughter of novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe neglected to do her homework, her mother sent her from the dinner table and gave her only bread and water in her own apartment.
What Europeans saw as permissiveness was in reality the consequence of an emerging new idea of child-rearing, in which the childs will was not to be simply broken, but rather shaped.
In the little republic of the family, as in the Republic at large, good citizens were raised not to be meekly obedient to authority, but to be independent individuals who could make their own decisions on the basis of internalized moral standards.
Thus the outlines of the modern family were clear by midcentury: it was small, affectionate, and childcentered, and it provided a special arena for the talents of women.
Feminists of a later day might decry the stifling atmosphere of the nineteenth-century home, but to many women of the time, it seemed a big step upward from the conditions of grinding toiloften alongside men in the fieldsin which their mothers had lived.
As smoke-belching factories altered the eastern skyline, flourishing farms were changing the face of  the West.
The trans-Allegheny regionespecially the Ohio-Indiana-Illinois tierwas fast becoming the nations breadbasket.
Before long it would become a granary to the world.
Pioneer families first hacked a clearing out of the forest and then planted their painfully furrowed fields to corn.
The yellow grain was amazingly versatile.
It could be fed to hogs (corn on the hoof) or distilled into liquor (corn in the bottle).
Both these products could be transported more easily than the bulky grain itself, and they became the early western farmers staple market items.
So many hogs were butchered, traded, or shipped at Cincinnati that the city was known as the Porkopolis of the West.
Most western produce was at first floated down the Ohio-Mississippi River system, to feed the lusty appetite of the booming Cotton Kingdom.
But western farmers were as hungry for profits as southern slaves and planters were for food.
These tillers, spurred on by the easy availability of seemingly boundless acres, sought ways to bring more and more land into cultivation.
C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 Ingenious inventors came to their aid.
One of the first obstacles that frustrated the farmers was the thickly matted soil of the West, which snagged and snapped fragile wooden plows.
John Deere of Illinois in 1837 finally produced a steel plow that broke the virgin soil.
Sharp and effective, it was also light enough to be pulled by horses, rather than oxen.
In the 1830s Virginia-born Cyrus McCormick contributed the most wondrous contraption of all: a mechanical mower-reaper.
The clattering cogs of McCormicks horse-drawn machine were to the western farmers what the cotton gin was to the southern planters.
Seated on his red-chariot reaper, a single husbandman could do the work of five men with sickles and scythes.
No other American invention cut so wide a swath.
It made ambitious capitalists out of humble plowmen, who now scrambled for more acres on which to plant more fields of billowing wheat.
Subsistence farming gave way to production for the market, as large-scale (extensive), specialized, cash-crop agriculture came to dominate the transAllegheny West.
With it followed mounting indebtedness, as farmers bought more land and more machinery to work it.
Soon hustling farmerbusinesspeople were annually harvesting a larger crop than the Southwhich was becoming selfsufficient in food productioncould devour.
They began to dream of markets elsewherein the mushrooming factory towns of the East or across the faraway Atlantic.
But they were still largely landlocked.
Commerce moved north and south on the river systems.
Before it could begin to move eastwest in bulk, a transportation revolution would have to occur.
In 1789, when the Constitution was launched, primitive methods of travel were still in use.
Waterborne commerce, whether along the coast or on the rivers, was slow, uncertain, and often dangerous.
Stagecoaches and wagons lurched over bone-shaking roads.
Passengers would be routed out to lay nearby fence rails across muddy stretches, and occasionally horses would drown in muddy pits while wagons sank slowly out of sight.
Cheap and efficient carriers were imperative if raw materials were to be transported to factories and if finished products were to be delivered to consumers.
On December 3, 1803, a firm in Providence, Rhode Island, sent a shipment of yarn to a point sixty miles away, notifying the purchaser that the consignment could be expected to arrive in the course of the winter.
A promising improvement came in the 1790s, when a private company completed the Lancaster Turnpike in Pennsylvania.
It was a broad, hardsurfaced highway that thrust sixty-two miles westward from Philadelphia to Lancaster.
As drivers approached the tollgate, they were confronted with a barrier of sharp pikes, which were turned aside when they paid their toll.
Hence the term  The Lancaster Turnpike proved to be a highly successful venture, returning as high as 15 percent annual dividends to its stockholders.
It attracted  a rich trade to Philadelphia and touched off a  turnpike-building boom that lasted about twenty years.
It also stimulated western development.
The turnpikes beckoned to the canvas-covered Conestoga wagons, whose creakings heralded a westward advance that would know no real retreat.
Western road building, always expensive, encountered many obstacles.
One pesky roadblock was the noisy states righters, who opposed federal aid to local projects.
Eastern states also protested against being bled of their populations by the  westward-reaching arteries.
Westerners scored a notable triumph in 1811 when the federal government began to construct the elongated National Road, or Cumberland Road.
This highway ultimately stretched from Cumberland, in western Maryland, to Vandalia, in Illinois, a distance of 591 miles.
The War of 1812  interrupted construction, and states rights shackles on internal improvements hampered federal grants.
But the thoroughfare was belatedly brought to its destination in 1852 by a combination of aid from the states and the federal government.
The steamboat craze, which overlapped the turnpike craze, was touched off by an ambitious painter-engineer named Robert Fulton.
He installed a powerful steam engine in a vessel that posterity came to know as the  public dubbed Fultons Folly.
On a historic day in 1807, the quaint little ship, belching sparks from its single smokestack, churned steadily from New York City up the Hudson River toward Albany.
It made the run of 150 miles in 32 hours.
The success of the steamboat was sensational.
People could now in large degree defy wind, wave, tide, and downstream current.
Within a few years, Fulton had changed all of Americas navigable streams into two-way arteries, thereby doubling their carrying capacity.
Hitherto keelboats had been pushed up the Mississippi, with quivering poles and raucous profanity, at less than one mile an houra process that was prohibitively expensive.
Now the C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 steamboats could churn rapidly against the current, ultimately attaining speeds in excess of ten miles an hour.
The mighty Mississippi had met its master.
By 1820 there were some sixty steamboats on the Mississippi and its tributaries; by 1860 about one thousand, some of them luxurious river palaces.
Keen rivalry among the swift and gaudy steamers led to memorable races.
Excited passengers would urge the captain to pile on wood at the risk of bursting the boilers, which all too often exploded, with tragic results for the floating firetraps.
Chugging steamboats played a vital role in the opening of the West and South, both of which were richly endowed with navigable rivers.
Like bunches of grapes on a vine, population clustered along the banks of the broad-flowing streams.
Cotton growers and other farmers made haste to take up and turn over the now-profitable virgin soil.
Not only could they float their produce out to market, but, hardly less important, they could ship in at low cost  their shoes, hardware, and other manufactured necessities.
Louis Indianapolis Springfield Baltimore Lancaster Wheeling Terre Haute Columbus Philadelphia IOWA WIS.
ILL.
IND.
MICH.
OHIO KY.
N.J.
DEL.
N.Y.
Cumberland Road Main connections Lancaster Turnpike Cumberland (National) Road and Main Connections Note also the Lancaster Turnpike.
A canal-cutting craze paralleled the boom in turnpikes and steamboats.
A few canals had been built around falls and elsewhere in colonial days, but ambitious projects lay in the future.
Resourceful New Yorkers, cut off from federal aid by states righters, themselves dug the Erie Canal, linking the Great Lakes with the Hudson River.
They were blessed with the driving leadership of Governor DeWitt Clinton, whose grandiose project was scoffingly called Clintons Big Ditch or the Governors Gutter.
Begun in 1817, the canal eventually ribboned 363 miles.
On its completion in 1825, a garlanded canal boat glided from Buffalo, on Lake Erie, to the Hudson River and on to New York harbor.
There, with colorful ceremony, Governor Clinton emptied a cask of water from the lake to symbolize the marriage of the waters.
The water from Clintons keg baptized the Empire State.
Mule-drawn passengers and bulky freight could now be handled with thrift and dispatch, at the dizzy speed of five miles an hour.
The cost of shipping a ton of grain from Buffalo to New York City fell from $100 to $5, and the time of transit from about twenty days to six.
Ever-widening economic ripples followed the completion of the Erie Canal.
The value of land along the route skyrocketed, and new citiessuch as Rochester and Syracuseblossomed.
Industry in the state boomed.
The new profitability of farming in the Old Northwestnotably in Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, and Illinoisattracted thousands of European immigrants to the unaxed and untaxed lands now available.
Flotillas of steamships soon plied  the Great Lakes, connecting with canal barges at Buffalo.
Interior waterside villages like Cleveland, Detroit, and Chicago exploded into mighty cities.
Other profound economic and political changes followed the canals completion.
The price of potatoes in New York City was cut in half, and many dispirited New England farmers, no longer able to face the ruinous competition, abandoned their rocky holdings and went elsewhere.
Some became mill hands, thus speeding the industrialization of America.
Others, finding it easy to go west over the Erie Canal, took up new farmland south of the Great Lakes, where they were joined by thousands of New Yorkers and other northerners.
Still others shifted to fruit, vegetable, and dairy farming.
The transformations in the Northeastcanal consequences showed how long-established local market structures could be swamped by the emerging behemoth of a continental economy.
C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 Erie Canal and Main Branches  The Erie Canal system, and others like it, tapped the fabulous agricultural potential of the Midwest, while canal construction and maintenance provided employment for displaced eastern farmers squeezed off the land by competition from their more productive midwestern cousins.
The transportation revolution thus simultaneously expanded the nations acreage under cultivation and speeded the shift of the work force from agricultural to manufacturing and service occupations.
In 1820 more than threequarters of American workers labored on farms; by 1850 only a little more than half of them were so employed.
(Also see the map on the top of page 313.
) 1.
Genesee Valley Canal 2.
Oswego Canal 3.
Black River Canal 4.
Chenango Canal 5.
Champlain Canal C A N A D A Erie Canal Schenectady Troy Albany Utica Rome Syracuse Carthage Lockport Buffalo Olean Oswego Binghamton Rochester New York N.J.
CONN.
MASS.
NEW              YORK PENNSYLVANIA The most significant contribution to the development of such an economy proved to be the railroad.
It was fast, reliable, cheaper than canals to construct, and not frozen over in winter.
Able to go almost anywhere, even through the Allegheny barrier, it defied terrain and weather.
The first railroad appeared in the United States in 1828.
By 1860, only thirty-two years later, the United States boasted thirty thousand miles of railroad track, threefourths of it in the rapidly industrializing North.
At first the railroad faced strong opposition from vested interests, especially canal backers.
Anxious to protect its investment in the Erie Canal, the New York legislature in 1833 prohibited the railroads from carrying freightat least temporarily.
Early railroads were also considered a dangerous public menace, for flying sparks could set fire to nearby haystacks and houses, and appalling railway accidents could turn the wooden miniature hells into flaming funeral pyres for their riders.
Railroad pioneers had to overcome other obstacles as well.
Brakes were so feeble that the engineer might miss the station twice, both arriving and backing up.
Arrivals and departures were conjectural, and numerous differences in gauge (the distance between the rails) meant frequent changes of Erie Canal Delaware and Raritan Canal Pennsylvania Canal Ohio and Erie Canal (Under construction) Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Wabash and Erie Canal Miami and Erie Canal Toledo Evansville Portsmouth Cincinnati New York New Brunswick Baltimore Washington Trenton Albany Troy Buffalo Pittsburgh Cumberland Cleveland Columbia Philadelphia MASS.
R.I.
MAINE VT.
NEW YORK N.J.
CONN.
DEL.
PENNSYLVANIA VIRGINIA MD.
WIS.
ILL.
OHIO INDIANA MICHIGAN N.H.
Principal Canals in 1840  Note that the canals mainly facilitated east-west traffic, especially along the great Lake Erie artery.
No comparable network of canals existed in the South a disparity that helps to explain northern superiority in the Civil War that came two decades later.
Railroads, 1850 Houston New Orleans Jacksonville Savannah Charleston Jackson Memphis Nashville Louisville Cincinnati St.
Louis St.
Joseph Chicago Detroit Pittsburgh Richmond Washington, D.C.
Philadelphia New York Boston BRITISH NORTH AMERICA (CANADA) Railroads built 1850  1860 The Railroad Revolution  Note the explosion of new railroad construction in the 1850s and its heavy concentration in the North.
trains for passengers.
In 1840 there were seven transfers between Philadelphia and Charleston.
But gauges gradually became standardized, better brakes did brake, safety devices were adopted, and the Pullman sleeping palace was introduced in 1859.
America at long last was being bound together with braces of iron, later to be made of steel.
Other forms of transportation and communication were binding together the United States and the world.
A crucial development came in 1858 when Cyrus Field, called the greatest wire puller in history, finally stretched a cable under the deep North Atlantic waters from Newfoundland to Ireland.
Although this initial cable went dead after three weeks of public rejoicing, a heavier cable laid in 1866 permanently linked the American and European continents.
The United States merchant marine encountered rough sailing during much of the early nineteenth century.
American vessels had been repeatedly laid up by the embargo, the War of 1812, and the panics of 1819 and 1837.
American naval designers made few contributions to maritime progress.
A pioneer American steamer, the  used sail most of the time and was pursued for a day by a British captain who thought it afire.
In the 1840s and 1850s, a golden age dawned  for American shipping.
Yankee naval yards, notably Donald McKays at Boston, began to send down the ways sleek new craft called clipper ships.
Long, narC HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 row, and majestic, they glided across the sea under towering masts and clouds of canvas.
In a fair breeze, they could outrun any steamer.
The stately clippers sacrificed cargo space for speed, and their captains made killings by hauling high-value cargoes in record times.
They wrested much of the tea-carrying trade between the Far East and Britain from their slower-sailing British competitors, and they sped thousands of impatient adventurers to the goldfields of California and  Australia.
But the hour of glory for the clipper was relatively brief.
On the eve of the Civil War, the British had clearly won the world race for maritime ascendancy with their iron tramp steamers (teakettles).
Although slower and less romantic than the clipper, these vessels were steadier, roomier, more reliable, and hence more profitable.
No story of rapid American communication would be complete without including the Far  West.
By 1858 horse-drawn overland stagecoaches, immortalized by Mark Twains  a familiar sight.
Their dusty tracks stretched from the bank of the muddy Missouri River clear to  California.
Even more dramatic was the Pony Express, established in 1860 to carry mail speedily the two thousand lonely miles from St.
Joseph, Missouri,  to Sacramento, California.
Daring, lightweight riders, leaping onto wiry ponies saddled at stations Never shoot on the road as the noise might frighten the horses.
Dont point out where murders have been committed, especially if there are women passengers.
Expect annoyances, discomfort, and some hardships.
approximately ten miles apart, could make the trip in an amazing ten days.
These unarmed horsemen galloped on, summer or winter, day or night, through dust or snow, past Indians and bandits.
The speeding postmen missed only one trip, though the whole enterprise lost money heavily and folded after only eighteen legend-leaving months.
Just as the clippers had succumbed to steam, so were the express riders unhorsed by Samuel Morses clacking keys, which began tapping messages to California in 1861.
The swift ships and the fleet ponies ushered out a dying technology of wind and muscle.
In the future, machines would be in the saddle.
More than anything else, the desire of the East to tap the West stimulated the transportation revolution.
Until about 1830 the produce of the western region drained southward to the cotton belt or to the heaped-up wharves of New Orleans.
The steamboat vastly aided the reverse flow of finished goods up the watery western arteries and helped bind West and South together.
But the truly revolutionary changes in commerce and communication came in the three decades before the Civil War, as canals and railroad tracks radiated out from the East, across the Alleghenies and into the blossoming heartland.
The ditch-diggers and tie-layers were attempting nothing less than a conquest of nature itself.
They would offset the natural flow of trade on the interior rivers by laying down an impressive grid of internal improvements.
The builders succeeded beyond their wildest dreams.
The Mississippi was increasingly robbed of its traffic, as goods moved eastward on chugging trains, puffing lake boats, and mule-tugged canal barges.
Governor Clinton had in effect picked up the mighty Father of Waters and flung it over the Alleghenies, forcing it to empty into the sea at New York City.
By the 1840s the city of Buffalo handled more western produce than New Orleans.
Between 1836 and 1860, grain shipments through Buffalo increased a staggering sixtyfold.
New York City became the seaboard queen of the nation, a gigantic port through which a vast hinterland poured its wealth and to which it daily paid economic tribute.
By the eve of the Civil War, a truly continental economy had emerged.
The principle of division of C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 Main Routes West Before the Civil War Mark Twain described his stagecoach trip to California in the 1860s: We began to get into country, now, threaded here and there with little streams.
These had high, steep banks on each side, and every time we flew down one bank and scrambled up the other, our party inside got mixed somewhat.
First we would all be down in a pile at the forward end of the stage,  .
and in a second we would shoot to the other end, and stand on our heads.
And .
as the dust rose from the tumult, we would all sneeze in chorus, and the majority of us would grumble, and probably say some hasty thing, like: Take your elbow out of my ribs!cant you quit crowding?
Omaha St.
Joseph St.
Louis Salt Lake City Portland San Diego Fort Kearny Santa Fe Independence Fort Laramie Sacramento (Sutter's Fort) San Francisco Los Angeles Fort Smith Cut-of f South Pass Oregon Trail California Trail Pony Express overland mail Mormon Trail Santa Fe Trail Spanish Trail  labor, which spelled productivity and profits in the factory, applied on a national scale as well.
Each region now specialized in a particular type of economic activity.
The South raised cotton for export to New England and Britain; the West grew grain and livestock to feed factory workers in the East and in Europe; the East made machines and textiles for the South and the West.
The economic pattern thus woven had fateful political and military implications.
Many southerners regarded the Mississippi as a silver chain that naturally linked together the upper valley states and the Cotton Kingdom.
They were convinced, as secession approached, that some or all of these states would have to secede with them or be strangled.
But they overlooked the man-made links that now bound the upper Mississippi Valley to the East in intimate commercial union.
Southern rebels would have to fight not only Northern armies but the tight bonds of an interdependent continental economy.
Economically, the two northerly sections were Siamese twins.
No less revolutionary than the political upheavals of the antebellum era was the market revolution that transformed a subsistence economy of scattered farms and tiny workshops into a national network of industry and commerce.
As more and more Americansmill workers as well as farmhands, women as well as menlinked their economic fate to the burgeoning market economy, the self-sufficient households of colonial days were transformed.
Most families had once raised all their own food, spun their own wool, and bartered with their neighbors for the few necessities they could not make themselves.
In growing numbers they now scattered to work for wages in the mills, or they planted just a few crops for sale at market and used the money to buy goods made by strangers in far-off factories.
As store-bought fabrics, candles, and soap replaced homemade products, a quiet revolution occurred  in the household division of labor and status.
Traditional womens work was rendered superfluous and devalued.
The home itself, once a center of economic production in which all family members cooperated, grew into a place of refuge from the world of work, a refuge that became increasingly the special and separate sphere of women.
Revolutionary advances in manufacturing and transportation brought increased prosperity to all Americans, but they also widened the gulf between the rich and the poor.
Millionaires had been rare in the early days of the Republic, but by the eve of the Civil War, several specimens of colossal financial success were strutting across the national stage.
Spectacular was the case of fur-trader and real estate speculator John Jacob Astor, who left an estate of $30 million on his death in 1848.
Cities bred the greatest extremes of economic inequality.
Unskilled workers, then as always, fared worst.
Many of them came to make up a floating mass of drifters, buffeted from town to town by the shifting prospects for menial jobs.
These wandering workers accounted at various times for up to half the population of the brawling industrial centers.
Although their numbers were large, they left little behind them but the homely fruits of their transient labor.
Largely unstoried and unsung, they are among the forgotten men and women of American history.
Many myths about social mobility grew up over the buried memories of these unfortunate day laborers.
Mobility did exist in industrializing Americabut not in the proportions that legend often portrays.
Rags-to-riches success stories were relatively few.
Yet America, with its dynamic society and wideopen spaces, undoubtedly provided more opportunity than did the contemporary countries of the Old Worldwhich is why millions of immigrants packed their bags and headed for New World shores.
Moreover, a rising tide lifts all boats, and the improvement in overall standards of living was real.
Wages for unskilled workers in a labor-hungry America rose about 1 percent a year from 1820 to 1860.
This general prosperity helped defuse the potential class conflict that might otherwise have explodedand that did explode in many European countries.
C HAPTER 14 Forging the National Economy, 17901860 Industry and Agriculture, 1860 Still a nation of farmers on the eve of the Civil War, Americans had nevertheless made an impressive start on their own Industrial Revolution, especially in the Northeast.
Industrial Revolution begins in Britain Samuel Slater builds first U.S.
textile factory Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin Whitney develops interchangeable parts for  muskets Robert Fultons first steamboat Embargo spurs American manufacturing Cumberland Road construction begins Erie Canal construction begins Erie Canal completed First railroad in United States Cyrus McCormick invents mechanical  mower-reaper Anti-Catholic riot in Boston John Deere develops steel plow President Van Buren establishes ten-hour  day for federal employees Massachusetts declares labor unions legal in  Era of clipper ships Samuel Morse invents telegraph Anti-Catholic riot in Philadelphia Potato famine in Ireland Elias Howe invents sewing machine First general incorporation laws in New York Democratic revolutions collapse in Germany Order of the Star-Spangled Banner (KnowNothing party) formed Cumberland Road completed Cyrus Field lays first transatlantic cable Pony Express established First transcontinental telegraph Permanent transatlantic cable established For further reading, see page A10 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Ferment of Reform and Culture  17901860 R ALPH W ALDO E MERSON , T HE A MERICAN S CHOLAR , 1837 A third revolution accompanied the reformation of American politics and the transformation of the American economy in the mid-nineteenth century.
This was a diffuse yet deeply felt commitment to improve the character of ordinary Americans, to make them more upstanding, God-fearing, and literate.
Some high-minded souls were disillusioned by the rough-and-tumble realities of democratic politics.
Others, notably women, were excluded from the political game altogether.
As the young Republic grew, increasing numbers of Americans poured their considerable energies into religious revivals and reform movements.
Reform campaigns of all types flourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
There was not a reading man who was without some scheme for a new utopia in his waistcoat pocket, claimed Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Reformers promoted better public schools and rights for women, as well as  miracle medicines, polygamy, celibacy, rule by prophets, and guidance by spirits.
Societies were formed against alcohol, tobacco, profanity, and the transit of mail on the Sabbath.
Eventually overshadowing all other reforms was the great crusade against slavery (see pp.
362368).
Many reformers drew their crusading zeal from religion.
Beginning in the late 1790s and boiling over into the early nineteenth century, the Second Great Awakening swept through Americas Protestant churches, transforming the place of religion in American life and sending a generation of believers out on their missions to perfect the world.
Church attendance was still a regular ritual for about three-fourths of the 23 million Americans in 1850.
Alexis de Tocqueville declared that there was no country in the world where the Christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in America.
Yet the religion of these years was not the old-time religion of colonial days.
The austere Calvinist rigor had long been seeping out of the American churches.
The  rationalist ideas of the French Revolutionary era had done much to soften the older orthodoxy.
Thomas Paines widely circulated book  declared that all churches were set up to terrify  and enslave mankind, and monopolize power and profit.
American anticlericalism was seldom that virulent, but many of the Founding Fathers, including Jefferson and Franklin, embraced the liberal doctrines of Deism that Paine promoted.
Deists relied on reason rather than revelation, on science rather than the Bible.
They rejected the concept of original sin and denied Christs divinity.
Yet Deists believed in a Supreme Being who had created a knowable universe and endowed human beings with a capacity for moral behavior.
Deism helped to inspire an important spin-off from the severe Puritanism of the pastthe Unitarian faith, which began to gather momentum in New England at the end of the eighteenth century.
Unitarians held that God existed in only  Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit).
Although denying the deity of Jesus, Unitarians stressed the essential goodness of human nature rather than its vileness; they proclaimed their belief in free will and the possibility of salvation through good works; they pictured God not as a stern Creator but as a loving Father.
Embraced by many leading thinkers (including Ralph Waldo Emerson), the Unitarian movement appealed mostly to intellectuals whose rationalism and optimism contrasted sharply with the hellfire doctrines of Calvinism, especially predestination and human depravity.
A boiling reaction against the growing liberalism in religion set in about 1800.
A fresh wave of roaring revivals, beginning on the southern frontier but soon rolling even into the cities of the Northeast, sent the Second Great Awakening surging across the land.
Sweeping up even more people than the First Great Awakening (see p.
96) almost a century earlier, the Second Awakening was one of the most momentous episodes in the history of American religion.
This tidal wave of spiritual fervor left in its wake countless converted souls, many shattered and reorganized churches, and numerous new sects.
It also encouraged an effervescent evangelicalism that bubbled up into innumerable areas of American lifeincluding prison reform, the temperance cause, the womens movement, and the crusade to abolish slavery.
The Second Great Awakening was spread to the masses on the frontier by huge camp meetings.
As many as twenty-five thousand people would gather for an encampment of several days to drink the hellfire gospel as served up by an itinerant preacher.
Thousands of spiritually starved souls got religion at these gatherings and in their ecstasy engaged in frenzies of rolling, dancing, barking, and jerking.
Many of the saved soon backslid into their former sinful ways, but the revivals boosted church membership and stimulated a variety of humanitarian reforms.
Responsive easterners were moved to do missionary work in the West with Indians, in Hawaii, and in Asia.
Methodists and Baptists reaped the most abundant harvest of souls from the fields fertilized by revivalism.
Both sects stressed personal conversion (contrary to predestination), a relatively democratic control of church affairs, and a rousing emotionalism.
As a frontier jingle ran, Powerful Peter Cartwright (17851872) was the best known of the Methodist circuit riders, or traveling frontier preachers.
This ill-educated but sinewy servant of the Lord ranged for a half-century from Tennessee to Illinois, calling upon sinners to repent.
With bellowing voice and flailing arms, he converted thousands of souls to the Lord.
Not only did he lash the Devil with his tongue, but with his fists he knocked out rowdies who tried to break  up his meetings.
His Christianity was definitely  muscular.
Bell-voiced Charles Grandison Finney was the greatest of the revival preachers.
Trained as a lawyer, Finney abandoned the bar to become an evangelist after a deeply moving conversion experience as a young man.
Tall and athletically built, Finney held huge crowds spellbound with the power of his oratory and the pungency of his message.
He led massive revivals in Rochester and New York City in 1830 and 1831.
Finney preached a version of the old-time religion, but he was also an innovator.
He devised the anxious bench, where repentant sinners could sit in full view of the congregation, and he encouraged women to pray aloud in public.
Holding out the promise of a perfect Christian kingdom on earth, Finney denounced both alcohol and slavery.
He eventually served as president of Oberlin College in Ohio, which he helped to make a hotbed of revivalist activity and abolitionism.
A key feature of the Second Great Awakening was the feminization of religion, both in terms of church membership and theology.
Middle-class women, the wives and daughters of businessmen, were the first and most fervent enthusiasts of religious revivalism.
They made up the majority of new church members, and they were most likely to stay within the fold  when the tents were packed up and the traveling evangelists left town.
Perhaps womens greater ambivalence than men about the changes wrought by the expanding market economy made them such eager converts to piety.
It helped as well that evangelicals preached a gospel of female spiritual worth and offered women an active role in bringing their husbands and families back to God.
That accomplished, many women turned to saving the rest of society.
They formed a host of benevolent and charitable organizations and spearheaded crusades for most, if not all, of the eras ambitious reforms.
Revivals also furthered the fragmentation of religious faiths.
Western New York, where many descendants of New England Puritans had settled, was  so blistered by sermonizers preaching hellfire and damnation that it came to be known as the Burned-Over District.
Millerites, or Adventists, who mustered several hundred thousand adherents, rose from the superheated soil of the Burned-Over region in the 1830s.
Named after the eloquent and commanding William Miller, they interpreted the Bible to mean that Christ would return to earth on October 22, 1844.
Donning their go-to-meeting clothes, they gathered in prayerful assemblies to greet their Redeemer.
The failure of Jesus to descend on schedule dampened but did not destroy the movement.
Like the First Great Awakening, the Second Great Awakening tended to widen the lines between classes and regions.
The more prosperous and conservative denominations in the East were little touched by revivalism, and Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Unitarians continued to rise mostly from the wealthier,  better-educated levels of society.
Methodists, Baptists, and the members of the other new sects spawned by the swelling evangelistic fervor tended to come from less prosC HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 perous, less learned communities in the rural South and West.
Religious diversity further reflected social cleavages when the churches faced up to the slavery issue.
By 18441845 both the southern Baptists and the southern Methodists had split with their northern brethren over human bondage.
The Methodists came to grief over the case of a slaveowning bishop in Georgia, whose second wife added several household slaves to his estate.
In 1857 the Presbyterians, North and South, parted company.
The secession of the southern churches foreshadowed the secession of the southern states.
First the churches split, then the political parties split, and then the Union split.
The smoldering spiritual embers of the BurnedOver District kindled one especially ardent flame in 1830.
In that year Joseph Smitha rugged visionary, proud of his prowess at wrestlingreported that he had received some golden plates from an angel.
When deciphered, they constituted the Book of Mormon, and the Church of Jesus Christ of LatterDay Saints (Mormons) was launched.
It was a native American product, a new religion, destined to spread its influence worldwide.
After establishing a religious oligarchy, Smith ran into serious opposition from his non-Mormon neighbors, first in Ohio and then in Missouri and Illinois.
His cooperative sect rasped rank-and-file Americans, who were individualistic and dedicated to free enterprise.
The Mormons aroused further antagonism by voting as a unit and by openly but understandably drilling their militia for defensive purposes.
Accusations of polygamy likewise arose and increased in intensity, for Joseph Smith was reputed to have several wives.
Continuing hostility finally drove the Mormons to desperate measures.
In 1844 Joseph Smith and his brother were murdered and mangled by a mob in Carthage, Illinois, and the movement seemed near collapse.
The falling torch was seized by a remarkable Mormon Moses named Brigham Young.
Stern and austere in contrast to Smiths charm and affability, the barrel-chested Brigham Young had received only eleven days of formal schooling.
But he quickly proved to be an aggressive leader, an  eloquent preacher, and a gifted administrator.
Determined to escape further persecution, Young  in 18461847 led his oppressed and despoiled  Let the churches of all denominations speak out on the subject of temperance, let them close their doors against all who have anything to do with the death-dealing abomination, and the cause of temperance is triumphant.
A few years would annihilate the traffic.
Just so with slavery.
It is a great national sin.
It is a sin of the church.
The churches by their silence, and by permitting slaveholders to belong to their communion, have been consenting to it.
The church cannot turn away from this question.
It is a question for the church and for the nation to decide, and God will push it to a decision.
Latter-Day Saints over vast rolling plains to Utah as they sang Come, Come, Ye Saints.
Overcoming pioneer hardships, the Mormons soon made the desert bloom like a new Eden by means of ingenious and cooperative methods of irrigation.
The crops of 1848, threatened by hordes of crickets, were saved when flocks of gulls appeared, as if by a miracle, to gulp down the invaders.
(A  monument to the sea gulls stands in Salt Lake City today.
) Semiarid Utah grew remarkably.
By the end of 1848, some five thousand settlers had arrived, and other large bands were to follow them.
Many dedicated Mormons in the 1850s actually made the thirteen-hundred-mile trek across the plains pulling two-wheeled carts.
Under the rigidly disciplined management of Brigham Young, the community became a prosperous frontier theocracy and a cooperative commonwealth.
Young married as many as twenty-seven womensome of them wives in name onlyand begot fifty-six children.
The population was further swelled by thousands of immigrants from Europe, where the Mormons had established a flourishing missionary movement.
A crisis developed when the Washington government was unable to control the hierarchy of Brigham Young, who had been made territorial governor in 1850.
A federal army marched in 1857 against the Mormons, who harassed its lines of supply and rallied to die in their last dusty ditch.
Fortunately, the quarrel was finally adjusted without serious bloodshed.
The Mormons later ran afoul of the antipolygamy laws passed by Congress in 1862 and 1882, and their unique marital customs delayed statehood for Utah until 1896.
Tax-supported primary schools were scarce in the early years of the Republic.
They had the odor of pauperism about them, since they existed chiefly  to educate the children of the poorthe so-called ragged schools.
Advocates of free public education C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 It is both the right and the imperative duty of Congress to prohibit in the Territories those twin relics of barbarismPolygamy and Slavery.
met stiff opposition.
A midwestern legislator cried that he wanted only this simple epitaph when he died: Here lies an enemy of public education.
Well-to-do, conservative Americans gradually saw the light.
If they did not pay to educate other folkses brats, the brats might grow up into a dangerous, ignorant rabblearmed with the vote.
Taxation for education was an insurance premium that the wealthy paid for stability and democracy.
Tax-supported public education, though miserably lagging in the slavery-cursed South, triumphed between 1825 and 1850.
Grimy-handed laborers wielded increased influence and demanded instruction for their children.
Most important was the gaining of manhood suffrage for whites in Jacksons day.
A free vote cried aloud for free education.
A civilized nation that was both ignorant and free, declared Thomas Jefferson, never was and never will be.
The famed little red schoolhousewith one room, one stove, one teacher, and often eight gradesbecame the shrine of American democracy.
Regrettably, it was an imperfect shrine.
Early free schools stayed open only a few months of the year.
Schoolteachers, most of them men in this era,  were too often ill trained, ill tempered, and ill paid.
They frequently put more stress on lickin (with  a hickory stick) than on larnin.
These knights of the blackboard often boarded around in the  Nauvoo Carthage Council  Bluffs (Fort Laramie) Fort Bridger Fort Hall Salt Lake City Moab Beaver Parowan Cedar City Mountain Meadow St.
George Lee's Ferry Littlefield Las Vegas Tuba City Holbrook Luna Tempe Thatcher Mesa Pomerene St.
David Barstow San Bernardino Mormon Station Winter Quarters Mormon trek, 18461847 California Trail Mormon Corridor Proposed state of Deseret Current state boundaries Mormon settlements Non-Mormon settlement Fort (  ) The Mormon World After Joseph Smiths murder at Carthage in 1844, the Mormons abandoned their thriving settlement at Nauvoo, Illinois (which had about twenty thousand inhabitants in 1845), and set out for the valley of the Great Salt Lake, then still part of Mexico.
When the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (see p.
384) in 1848 brought the vast Utah Territory into the United States, the Mormons rapidly expanded their desert colony, which they called Deseret, especially along the Mormon Corridor that stretched from Salt Lake to southern California.
community, and some knew scarcely more than their older pupils.
They usually taught only the three Rsreadin, ritin, and rithmetic.
To many rugged Americans, suspicious of book larnin, this was enough.
Reform was urgently needed.
Into the breach stepped Horace Mann (17961859), a brilliant and idealistic graduate of Brown University.
As secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, he campaigned effectively for more and better schoolhouses, longer school terms, higher pay for teachers, and an expanded curriculum.
His influence radiated out to other states, and impressive improvements were chalked up.
Yet education remained an expensive luxury for many communities.
As late as 1860, the nation counted only about a hundred public secondary schoolsand nearly a million white adult illiterates.
Black slaves in the South were legally forbidden to receive instruction in reading or writing, and even free blacks, in the North as well as the South, were usually excluded from the schools.
Educational advances were aided by improved textbooks, notably those of Noah Webster (1758 1843), a Yale-educated Connecticut Yankee who was known as the Schoolmaster of the Republic.
His reading lessons, used by millions of children in the nineteenth century, were partly designed to proC HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 There were some schools so-called [in Indiana], but no qualification was ever required of a teacher beyond readin, writin and cipherin to the rule of three.
There was absolutely nothing to excite ambition for education.
Of course, when I came of age I did not know much.
Still, somehow, I could read, write and cipher to the rule of three, but that was all.
I have not been to school since.
The little advance I now have upon this store of education, I have picked up from time to time under the pressure of necessity.
I was raised to work, which I continued till I was twenty-two.
mote patriotism.
Webster devoted twenty years to his famous dictionary, published in 1828, which helped to standardize the American language.
Equally influential was Ohioan William H. McGuffey (18001873), a teacher-preacher of rare power.
His grade-school readers, first published in the 1830s, sold 122 million copies in the following decades.
ing lessons in morality, patriotism, and idealism.
Higher education was likewise stirring.
The religious zeal of the Second Great Awakening led to the planting of many small, denominational, liberal arts colleges, chiefly in the South and West.
Too often they were academically anemic, established more to satisfy local pride than genuinely to advance the cause of learning.
Like their more venerable, ivy-draped brethren, the new colleges offered a narrow,  tradition-bound curriculum of Latin, Greek, mathematics, and moral philosophy.
On new and old campuses alike, there was little intellectual vitality and much boredom.
The first state-supported universities sprang up in the South, beginning with North Carolina in 1795.
Federal land grants nourished the growth of state institutions of higher learning.
Conspicuous among the early group was the University of Virginia, founded in 1819.
It was largely the brainchild of Thomas Jefferson, who designed its beautiful architecture and who at times watched its construction through a telescope from his hilltop home.
He dedicated the university to freedom from religious or political shackles, and modern languages and the sciences received unusual emphasis.
Womens higher education was frowned upon  in the early decades of the nineteenth century.
A womans place was believed to be in the home, and training in needlecraft seemed more important than training in algebra.
In an era when the clinging-vine bride was the ideal, coeducation was regarded as frivolous.
Prejudices also prevailed that too much learning injured the feminine brain, undermined health, and rendered a young lady unfit for marriage.
The teachers of Susan B. Anthony, the future feminist, refused to instruct her in long division.
Womens schools at the secondary level began to attain some respectability in the 1820s, thanks in part to the dedicated work of Emma Willard (17871870).
In 1821 she established the Troy (New York) Female Seminary.
Oberlin College, in Ohio, jolted traditionalists in 1837 when it opened its doors to women as well as men.
(Oberlin had already created shock waves by admitting black students.
) In the same year, Mary Lyon established an outstanding womens school, Mount Holyoke Seminary (later College), in South Hadley, Massachusetts.
Mossback critics scoffed that theyll be educatin cows next.
Adults who craved more learning satisfied their thirst for knowledge at private subscription libraries or, increasingly, at tax-supported libraries.
Houseto-house peddlers also did a lush business in feeding the public appetite for culture.
Traveling lecturers helped to carry learning to the masses through the lyceum lecture associations, which numbered about three thousand by 1835.
The lyceums provided platforms for speakers in such areas as science, literature, and moral philosophy.
Talented talkers like Ralph Waldo Emerson journeyed thousands of miles on the lyceum circuits, casting their pearls of civilization before appreciative audiences.
The mass of mankind are very ignorant and wicked.
Wherefore is this?
Because the teacher of every human being, has been degraded by men from her high office; or, what is the same thing, been denied those privileges of education which only can enable her to discharge her duty to her children with discretion and effect.
If half the effort and expense had been directed to enlighten and improve the minds of females which have been lavished on the other sex, we should now have a very different state of society.
Magazines flourished in the preCivil War years, but most of them withered after a short life.
The long-lived leader of the intellectuals.
attained the enormous circulation (for those days) of 150,000.
It was devoured devotedly by millions of women, many of whom read the dog-eared copies of their relatives and friends.
As the young Republic grew, reform campaigns of all types flourished in sometimes bewildering abundance.
Some reformers were simply crackbrained cranks.
But most were intelligent, inspired idealists, usually touched by the fire of evangelical religion then licking through the pews and pulpits of American churches.
The optimistic promises of the Second Great Awakening inspired countless souls to do battle against earthly evils.
These modern idealists dreamed anew the old Puritan vision of a perfected society: free from cruelty, war, intoxicating drink, discrimination, andultimatelyslavery.
Women were particularly prominent in these reform crusades, especially in their own struggle for suffrage.
For many middle-class women, the reform campaigns provided a unique opportunity to escape the confines of the home and enter the arena of public affairs.
In part the practical, activist Christianity of these reformers resulted from their desire to reaffirm traditional values as they plunged ever further into a world disrupted and transformed by the turbulent forces of a market economy.
Mainly middleclass descendants of pioneer farmers, they were often blissfully unaware that they were witnessing the dawn of the industrial era, which posed unprecedented problems and called for novel ideas.
They either ignored the factory workers, for example, or blamed their problems on bad habits.
With naive single-mindedness, reformers sometimes applied conventional virtue to refurbishing an older orderwhile events hurtled them headlong into  the new.
Imprisonment for debt continued to be a nightmare, though its extent has been exaggerated.
As late as 1830, hundreds of penniless people were languishing in filthy holes, sometimes for owing less than one dollar.
The poorer working classes were especially hard hit by this merciless practice.
But as the embattled laborer won the ballot and asserted himself, state legislatures gradually abolished debtors prisons.
Criminal codes in the states were likewise being softened, in accord with more enlightened European practices.
The number of capital offenses was being reduced, and brutal punishments, such as whipping and branding, were being slowly eliminated.
A refreshing idea was taking hold that prisons should reform as well as punishhence reformatories, houses of correction, and penitentiaries (for penance).
Sufferers from so-called insanity were still being treated with incredible cruelty.
The medieval concept had been that the mentally deranged were C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 cursed with unclean spirits; the nineteenth-century idea was that they were willfully perverse and depravedto be treated only as beasts.
Many crazed persons were chained in jails or poor-houses with sane people.
Into this dismal picture stepped a formidable New England teacher-author, Dorothea Dix (18021887).
A physically frail woman afflicted with persistent lung trouble, she possessed infinite compassion and willpower.
She traveled some sixty thousand miles in eight years and assembled her damning reports on insanity and asylums from firsthand observations.
Though she never raised her voice, Dixs message was loud and clear.
Her classic petition of 1843 to the Massachusetts legislature, describing cells so foul that visitors were driven back by the stench, turned legislative stomachs  and hearts.
Her persistent prodding resulted in improved conditions and in a gain for the concept that the demented were not willfully perverse but mentally ill.
Agitation for peace also gained momentum in the preCivil War years.
In 1828 the American Peace Society was formed, with a ringing declaration of war on war.
A leading spirit was William Ladd, who orated when his legs were so badly ulcerated that he had to sit on a stool.
His ideas were finally to bear some fruit in the international organizations for  collective security of the twentieth century.
The American peace crusade, linked with a European counterpart, was making promising progress by midcentury, but it was set back by the bloodshed of the Crimean War in Europe and the Civil War in America.
The ever-present drink problem attracted dedicated reformers.
Custom, combined with a hard and monotonous life, led to the excessive drinking of hard liquor, even among women, clergymen, and members of Congress.
Weddings and funerals all too often became disgraceful brawls, and occasionally a drunken mourner would fall into the open grave with the corpse.
Heavy drinking decreased the  efficiency of labor, and poorly safeguarded machinery operated under the influence of alcohol increased the danger of accidents occurring at work.
Drunkenness also fouled the sanctity of the family,  idiotic subject chained, and one in a close stall for seventeen years.
doubly chained, hand and foot; another violent; several peaceable now.
insane disadvantageously placed in the jail.
In the almshouse, two females in stalls .
; lie in wooden bunks filled with straw; always shut up.
One of these subjects is supposed curable.
The overseers of the poor have declined giving her a trial at the hospital, as  I was informed, on account of expense.
C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 threatening the spiritual welfareand physical safetyof women and children.
After earlier and feebler efforts, the American Temperance Society was formed at Boston in 1826.
Within a few years, about a thousand local groups sprang into existence.
They implored drinkers to sign the temperance pledge and organized childrens clubs, known as the Cold Water Army.
Temperance crusaders also made effective use of pictures, pamphlets, and lurid lecturers, some of whom were reformed drunkards.
A popular temperance song ran, The most popular anti-alcohol tract of the era was T. S. Arthurs melodramatic novel,  described in shocking detail how a once-happy village was ruined by Sam Slades tavern.
The book was second only to Stowes  seller in the 1850s, and it enjoyed a highly successful run on the stage.
Its touching theme song began with the words of a little girl: Early foes of Demon Drink adopted two major lines of attack.
One was to stiffen the individuals will to resist the wiles of the little brown jug.
The moderate reformers thus stressed temperance rather than teetotalism, or the total elimination of intoxicants.
But less patient zealots came to believe that temptation should be removed by legislation.
Prominent among this group was Neal S. Dow of Maine, a blue-nosed reformer who, as a mayor of Portland and an employer of labor, had often witnessed the debauching effect of alcoholto say nothing of the cost to his pocketbook of work time lost because of drunken employees.
Dowthe Father of Prohibitionsponsored the so-called Maine Law of 1851.
This drastic new statute, hailed as the law of Heaven Americanized, prohibited the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor.
Other states in the North followed Maines example, and by 1857 about a dozen had passed various prohibitory laws.
But these figures are deceptive, for within a decade some of the statutes were repealed or declared unconstitutional, if not openly flouted.
It was clearly impossible to legislate thirst for alcohol out of existence, especially in localities where public sentiment was hostile.
Yet on the eve of the Civil War, the prohibitionists had registered inspiring gains.
There was much less drinking among women than earlier in the century and probably much less per capita consumption of hard liquor.
When the nineteenth century opened, it was still a mans world, both in America and in Europe.
A wife was supposed to immerse herself in her home and subordinate herself to her lord and master (her husband).
Like black slaves, she could not vote; like black slaves, she could be legally beaten by her overlord with a reasonable instrument.
When she married, she could not retain title to her property; it passed to her husband.
Yet American women, though legally regarded as perpetual minors, fared better than their European cousins.
French visitor Alexis de Tocqueville noted that in his native France, rape was punished only lightly, whereas in America it was one of the few crimes punishable by death.
Despite these relative advantages, women were still the submerged sex in America in the early part of the century.
But as the decades unfolded, women increasingly surfaced to breathe the air  of freedom and self-determination.
In contrast to women in colonial times, many women now avoided marriage altogetherabout 10 percent of adult women remained spinsters at the time of the Civil War.
Gender differences were strongly emphasized in nineteenth-century Americalargely because the burgeoning market economy was increasingly separating women and men into sharply distinct economic roles.
Women were thought to be physically and emotionally weak, but also artistic and refined.
Endowed with finely tuned moral sensibilities, they were the keepers of societys conscience, with special responsibility to teach the young how to be good and productive citizens of the Republic.
Men were considered strong but crude, always in danger of slipping into some savage or beastly way of life if not guided by the gentle hands of their loving ladies.
The home was a womans special sphere, the centerpiece of the cult of domesticity.
Even reformers like Catharine Beecher, who urged her sisters to seek employment as teachers, endlessly celebrated the role of the good homemaker.
But some women increasingly felt that the glorified sanctuary of the home was in fact a gilded cage.
They yearned to tear down the bars that separated the private world of women from the public world of men.
Clamorous female reformersmost of them white and well-to-dobegan to gather strength as the century neared its halfway point.
Most were broad-gauge battlers; while demanding rights for women, they joined in the general reform movement of the age, fighting for temperance and the abolition of slavery.
Like men, they had been touched by the evangelical spirit that offered the promise of earthly reward for human endeavor.
Neither foul eggs nor foul words, when hurled by disapproving men, could halt women heartened by these doctrines.
The womens rights movement was mothered by some arresting characters.
Prominent among them was Lucretia Mott, a sprightly Quaker whose ire had been aroused when she and her fellow female delegates to the London antislavery convention of 1840 were not recognized.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a mother of seven who had insisted on leaving obey out of her marriage ceremony, shocked fellow feminists by going so far as to advocate suffrage for women.
Quaker-reared Susan B. Anthony, a militant lecturer for womens rights, fearlessly exposed herself to rotten garbage and vulgar epithets.
She became such a conspicuous advocate of female rights that progressive women everywhere were called Suzy Bs.
Other feminists challenged the mans world.
Elizabeth Blackwell, a pioneer in a previously forbidden profession for women, was the first female graduate of a medical college.
Precocious Margaret Fuller edited a transcendentalist journal,  C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 took part in the struggle to bring unity and republican government to Italy.
She died in a shipwreck off New Yorks Fire Island while returning to the United States in 1850.
The talented Grimk sisters, Sarah and Angelina, championed antislavery.
Lucy Stone retained her maiden name after marriagehence the latter-day Lucy Stoners, who follow her example.
Amelia Bloomer revolted against the current street sweeping female attire by donning a semimasculine short skirt with Turkish trousers bloomers, they were calledamid much bawdy ridicule about Bloomerism and loose habits.
A jeering male rhyme of the times jabbed, Fighting feminists met at Seneca Falls, New York, in a memorable Womans Rights Convention (1848).
The defiant Stanton read a Declaration of Sentiments, which in the spirit of the Declaration of Independence declared that all men  are created equal.
One resolution formally demanded the ballot for females.
Amid scorn and denunciation from press and pulpit, the Seneca Falls meeting launched the modern womens rights movement.
The crusade for womens rights was eclipsed by the campaign against slavery in the decade before the Civil War.
Still, any white male, even an idiot, over the age of twenty-one could vote, while no woman could.
Yet women were gradually being admitted to colleges, and some states, beginning with Mississippi in 1839, were even permitting wives to own property after marriage.
While acknowledging our mutual affection by publicly assuming the relation of husband and wife, yet in justice to ourselves and a great principle, we deem it a duty to declare that this act on our part implies no .
promise of voluntary obedience to such of the present laws of marriage, as refuse to recognize the wife as an independent, rational being, while they confer upon the husband  an injurious and unnatural superiority.
Bolstered by the utopian spirit of the age, various reformers, ranging from the high-minded to the lunatic fringe, set up more than forty communities of a cooperative, communistic, or communitarian nature.
Seeking human betterment, a wealthy and idealistic Scottish textile manufacturer, Robert Owen, founded in 1825 a communal society of about a thousand people at New Harmony, Indiana.
Little harmony prevailed in the colony, which, in addition to hard-working visionaries, attracted a sprinkling of radicals, work-shy theorists, and outright scoundrels.
The colony sank in a morass of contradiction and confusion.
Brook Farm in Massachusetts, comprising two hundred acres of grudging soil, was started in 1841 with the brotherly and sisterly cooperation of about twenty intellectuals committed to the philosophy of transcendentalism (see p.
340).
They prospered reasonably well until 1846, when they lost by fire a large new communal building shortly before its completion.
The whole venture in plain living and high thinking then collapsed in debt.
The Brook Farm experiment inspired Nathaniel Hawthornes classic novel   character was modeled on the feminist writer Margaret Fuller.
A more radical experiment was the Oneida Community, founded in New York in 1848.
It practiced free love (complex marriage), birth control (through male continence, or  and the eugenic selection of parents to produce superior offspring.
This curious enterprise flourished for more than thirty years, largely because its artisans made superior steel traps and Oneida Community (silver) Plate (see Makers of America: The Oneida Community, pp.
336337).
Various communistic experiments, mostly small in scale, have been attempted since Jamestown.
But in competition with democratic free enterprise and free land, virtually all of them sooner or later failed or changed their methods.
Among the longest-lived sects were the Shakers.
Led by Mother Ann Lee, they began in the 1770s to set up the first of a score or so of religious communities.
The Shakers attained a membership of about six thousand in 1840, but since their monastic customs prohibited both marriage and sexual relations, they were virtually extinct by 1940.
Early Americans, confronted with pioneering problems, were more interested in practical gadgets than in pure science.
Jefferson, for example, was a gifted amateur inventor who won a gold medal for a new type of plow.
Noteworthy also were the writings of the mathematician Nathaniel Bowditch (17331838) C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 on practical navigation and of the oceanographer Matthew F. Maury (18061873) on ocean winds and currents.
These writers promoted safety, speed, and economy.
But as far as basic science was concerned, Americans were best known for borrowing and adapting the findings of Europeans.
Yet the Republic was not without scientific talent.
The most influential American scientist of the first half of the nineteenth century was Professor Benjamin Silliman (17791864), a pioneer chemist and geologist who taught and wrote brilliantly at Yale College for more than fifty years.
Professor Louis Agassiz (18071873), a distinguished FrenchSwiss immigrant, served for a quarter of a century at Harvard College.
A path-breaking student of biology who sometimes carried snakes in his pockets, he insisted on original research and deplored the reigning overemphasis on memory work.
Professor Asa Gray (18101888) of Harvard College, the Columbus of American botany, published over 350 books, monographs, and papers.
His textbooks set new standards for clarity and interest.
Lovers of American bird lore owed much to  the French-descended naturalist John J. Audubon (17851851), who painted wild fowl in their natural habitat.
His magnificently illustrated  Society for the protection of birds was named after him, although as a young man he shot much feathered game for sport.
Medicine in America, despite a steady growth of medical schools, was still primitive by modern standards.
Bleeding remained a common cure, and a curse as well.
Smallpox plagues were still dreaded, and the yellow fever epidemic of 1793 in Philadelphia took several thousand lives.
Bring out your dead!
was the daily cry of the corpse-wagon drivers.
People everywhere complained of ill health malaria, the rheumatics, the miseries, and the chills.
Illness often resulted from improper diet, hurried eating, perspiring and cooling off too rapidly, and ignorance of germs and sanitation.
We was sick every fall, regular, wrote the mother of future president James Garfield.
Life expectancy was still dismayingly shortabout forty years for a white person born in 1850, and less for blacks.
The suffering from decayed or ulcerated teeth was enormous; tooth extraction was often practiced by the muscular village blacksmith.
Self-prescribed patent medicines were common (one dose for people, two for horses) and included Robertsons Infallible Worm Destroying Lozenges.
Fad diets proved popular, including the wholewheat bread and crackers regimen of Sylvester Graham.
Among home remedies was the rubbing of tumors with dead toads.
The use of medicine by the regular doctors was often harmful, and Dr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes declared in 1860 that if the medicines, as then employed, were thrown into the sea, humans would be better off and the fish worse off.
Victims of surgical operations were ordinarily tied down, often after a stiff drink of whiskey.
The surgeon then sawed or cut with breakneck speed, undeterred by the piercing shrieks of the patient.
A priceless boon for medical progress came in  the early 1840s, when several American doctors  and dentists, working independently, successfully employed laughing gas and ether as anesthetics.
Architecturally, America contributed little of note  in the first half of the century.
The rustic Republic, still under pressure to erect shelters in haste, was continuing to imitate European models.
Public buildings and other important structures followed Greek and Roman lines, which seemed curiously out of place in a wilderness setting.
A remarkable Greek revival came between 1820 and 1850, partly The alarm about the cholera has prevented all the usual jollification under the public authority.
The Board of Health reports to-day twenty new cases and eleven deaths since noon yesterday.
The disease is here in all its violence and will increase.
God grant that its ravages may be confined, and its visit short.
ohn Humphrey Noyes (18111886), the founder of the Oneida Community, repudiated the old Puritan doctrines that God was vengeful and that sinful mankind was doomed to dwell in a vale of tears.
Noyes believed in a benign deity, in the sweetness of human nature, and in the possibility of a perfect Christian community on earth.
The more we get acquainted with God, he declared, the more we shall find it our special duty to be happy.
That sunny thought was shared by many earlynineteenth-century American utopians (a word derived from Greek that slyly combines the meanings of a good place and no such place).
But Noyes added some wrinkles of his own.
The key to happiness, he taught, was the suppression of selfishness.
True Christians should possess no private propertynor should they indulge in exclusive emotional relationships, which bred jealousy, quarreling, and covetousness.
Material things and sexual partners alike, Noyes preached, should be shared.
Marriage should not be monogamous.
Instead all members of the community should be free to love one another in complex marriage.
Noyes called his system Bible Communism.
Tall and slender, with piercing blue eyes and reddish hair, the charismatic Noyes began voicing these ideas in his hometown of Putney, Vermont, in the 1830s.
He soon attracted a group of followers who called themselves the Putney Association, a kind of extended family whose members farmed five hundred acres by day and sang and prayed together in the evenings.
They sustained their spiritual intensity by submitting to Mutual Criticism, in which the person being criticized would sit in silence while other members frankly discussed his or her faults and merits.
I was, metaphorically, stood upon my head and allowed to drain till all the  self-righteousness had dripped out of me, one man wrote of his experience with Mutual Criticism.
The Putney Association also indulged in sexual practices that outraged the surrounding communitys sense of moral propriety.
Indicted for adultery in 1847, Noyes led his followers to Oneida, in the supposedly more tolerant region of New Yorks BurnedOver District, the following year.
Several affiliated communities were also established, the most important of which was at Wallingford, Connecticut.
The Oneidans struggled in New York until they were joined in the 1850s by Sewell Newhouse, a clever inventor of steel animal traps.
The manufacture of Newhouses traps, and other products such as sewing silk and various types of bags, put the Oneida Community on a sound financial footing.
By the 1860s Oneida was a flourishing commonwealth of some three hundred people.
Men and women shared equally in all the communitys tasks, from field to factory to kitchen.
The members lived under one roof in Mansion House, a sprawling building that boasted central heating, a well-stocked library, and a common dining hall, as well as the Big Hall where members gathered nightly for prayer and entertainment.
Children at the age of three were removed from direct parental care and raised communally in the Childrens House until the age of thirteen or fourteen, when they took up jobs in the communitys industries.
They imbibed their religious doctrines with their school lessons: Oneidas apparent success fed the utopian dreams of others, and for a time it became a great tourist attraction.
Visitors from as far away as Europe came to picnic on the shady lawns, speculating on the sexual secrets that Mansion House guarded, while their hosts fed them strawberries and cream and entertained them with music.
But eventually the same problems that had driven Noyes and his band from Vermont began to shadow their lives at Oneida.
Their New York neighbors grew increasingly horrified at the Oneidans licentious sexual practices, including the selective breeding program by which the community matched mates and gave permissionor orders to procreate, without regard to the niceties of matrimony.
It was somewhat startling to me, one straight-laced visitor commented, to hear   speak about her baby.
Yielding to their neighbors criticisms, the Oneidans gave up complex marriage in 1879.
Soon other communistic practices withered away as well.
The communal dining hall became a restaurant, where meals were bought with money, something many Oneidans had never used before.
In 1880 the Oneidans abandoned communism altogether and became a joint-stock company specializing in the manufacture of silver tableware.
Led by Noyess son Pierrepont, Oneida Community, Ltd., grew into the worlds leading manufacturer of stainless steel knives, forks, and spoons, with annual sales by the 1990s of some half a billion dollars.
As for Mansion House, it still stands in central New York, but it now serves as a museum and private residence.
The Big Hall is the site of Oneida,  Ltd.s annual shareholders meetings.
Ironically, what grew from Noyess religious vision was not utopia but a mighty capitalist corporation.
stimulated by the heroic efforts of the Greeks in the 1820s to wrest independence from the terrible Turk.
About midcentury strong interest developed in a revival of Gothic forms, with their emphasis on pointed arches and large windows.
Talented Thomas Jefferson, architect of revolution, was probably the ablest American architect of his generation.
He brought a classical design to his Virginia hilltop home, Monticelloperhaps the most stately mansion in the nation.
The quadrangle of the University of Virginia at Charlottesville, another of Jeffersons creations, remains one of the finest examples of classical architecture in America.
The art of painting continued to be handicapped.
It suffered from the dollar-grabbing of a raw civilization; from the hustle, bustle, and absence of leisure; from the lack of a wealthy class to sit for portraitsand then pay for them.
Some of the earliest painters were forced to go to England, where they found both training and patrons.
America exported artists and imported art.
Painting, like the theater, also suffered from the Puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of timeand often obscene.
John Adams boasted that he would not give a sixpence for a bust of Phidias or a painting by Raphael.
When Edward Everett, the eminent Boston scholar and orator, placed a statue of Apollo in his home, he had its naked limbs draped.
Competent painters nevertheless emerged.
Gilbert Stuart (17551828), a spendthrift Rhode Islander and one of the most gifted of the early group, wielded his brush in Britain in competition with the best artists.
He produced several portraits of Washington, all of them somewhat idealized and dehumanized.
Truth to tell, by the time he posed for Stuart, the famous general had lost his natural teeth and some of the original shape of his face.
Charles Willson Peale (17411827), a Marylander, painted some sixty portraits of Washington, who patiently sat for about fourteen of them.
John Trumbull (17561843), who had fought in the Revolutionary War, recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of striking canvases.
C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 During the nationalistic upsurge after the War of 1812, American painters of portraits turned increasingly from human landscapes to romantic mirrorings of local landscapes.
The Hudson River school excelled in this type of art.
At the same time, portrait painters gradually encountered some unwelcome competition from the invention of a crude photograph known as the daguerreotype, perfected about 1839 by a Frenchman, Louis Daguerre.
Music was slowly shaking off the restraints of colonial days, when the prim Puritans had frowned upon nonreligious singing.
Rhythmic and nostalgic darky tunes, popularized by whites, were becoming immense hits by midcentury.
Special favorites were the uniquely American minstrel shows, featuring white actors with blackened faces.
Dixie, later adopted by the Confederates as their battle hymn, was written in 1859, ironically in New York City by an Ohioan.
The most famous black songs, also ironically, came from a white Pennsylvanian, Stephen C. Foster (18261864).
His one excursion into the South occurred in 1852, after he had published Old Folks at Home.
Foster made a valuable contribution to American folk music by capturing the plaintive spirit of the slaves.
An odd and pathetic figure, he finally lost both his art and his popularity and died in a charity ward after drowning his sorrows in drink.
Who reads an American book?
sneered a British critic of 1820.
The painful truth was that the nations rough-hewn, pioneering civilization gave little encouragement to polite literature.
Much of the reading matter was imported or plagiarized from Britain.
Busy conquering a continent, the Americans poured most of their creative efforts into practical outlets.
Praiseworthy were political essays, like  like Tom Paines  tions, like the masterpieces of Daniel Webster.
In the category of nonreligious books published before 1820, Benjamin Franklins  one of the few that achieved genuine distinction.
His narrative is a classic in its simplicity, clarity, and inspirational quality.
Even so, it records only a fragment of Old Bens long, fruitful, and amorous life.
A genuinely American literature received a strong boost from the wave of nationalism that followed the War of Independence and especially the War of 1812.
By 1820 the older seaboard areas were sufficiently removed from the survival mentality of tree-chopping and butter-churning so that literature could be supported as a profession.
The Knickerbocker Group in New York blazed brilliantly across the literary heavens, thus enabling America for the first time to boast of a literature to match its magnificent landscapes.
Washington Irving (17831859), born in New York City, was the first American to win international recognition as a literary figure.
Steeped in the traditions of New Netherland, he published in 1809 his caricatures of the Dutch.
When the family business failed, Irving was forced to turn to the goose-feather pen.
In 18191820 he published  which brought him immediate fame at home and abroad.
Combining a pleasing style with delicate charm and quiet humor, he used English as well as American themes and included such immortal Dutch-American tales as Rip Van Winkle and The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.
Europe was amazed to find at last an American with a feather in his hand, not in his hair.
Later turning to Spanish locales and biography, Irving did much to interpret America to Europe and Europe to America.
He was, said the Englishman William Thackeray, the first ambassador whom the New World of letters sent to the Old.
James Fenimore Cooper (17891851) was the first American novelist, as Washington Irving was the first general writer, to gain world fame and to make New World themes respectable.
Marrying into a wealthy family, he settled down on the frontier of New York.
Reading one day to his wife from an insipid English novel, Cooper remarked in disgust that he could write a better book himself.
His wife challenged him to do soand he did.
After an initial failure, Cooper launched out upon an illustrious career in 1821 with his second novel,   Revolution.
His stories of the sea were meritorious and popular, but his fame rests most enduringly  on the  named Natty Bumppo, one of natures noblemen, meets with Indians in stirring adventures like  novels had a wide sale among Europeans, some of whom came to think of all American people as  born with tomahawk in hand.
Actually Cooper was exploring the viability and destiny of Americas republican experiment, by contrasting the undefiled values of natural men, children of the wooded wilderness, with the artificiality of modern civilization.
A third member of the Knickerbocker group in New York was the belated Puritan William Cullen Bryant (17941878), transplanted from Massachusetts.
At age sixteen he wrote the meditative and melancholy Thanatopsis (published in 1817), which was one of the first high-quality poems produced in the United States.
Critics could hardly believe that it had been written on this side of the water.
Although Bryant continued with poetry, he was forced to make his living by editing the influential  a model for journalism that was dignified, liberal, and conscientious.
A golden age in American literature dawned in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, when an amazing outburst shook New England.
One of the mainsprings of this literary flowering was transcendentalism, especially around Boston, which preened itself as the Athens of America.
The transcendentalist movement of the 1830s resulted in part from a liberalizing of the straightjacket Puritan theology.
It also owed much to foreign influences, including the German romantic philosophers and the religions of Asia.
The transcendentalists rejected the prevailing theory, derived from John Locke, that all knowledge comes to the mind through the senses.
Truth, rather, transcends the senses: it cannot be found by observation alone.
Every person possesses an inner light C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 that can illuminate the highest truth and put him or her in direct touch with God, or the Oversoul.
These mystical doctrines of transcendentalism defied precise definition, but they underlay concrete beliefs.
Foremost was a stiff-backed individualism in matters religious as well as social.
Closely associated was a commitment to self-reliance, selfculture, and self-discipline.
These traits naturally bred hostility to authority and to formal institutions of any kind, as well as to all conventional wisdom.
Finally came exaltation of the dignity of the individual, whether black or whitethe mainspring of a whole array of humanitarian reforms.
Best known of the transcendentalists was Boston-born Ralph Waldo Emerson (18031882).
Tall, slender, and intensely blue-eyed, he mirrored serenity in his noble features.
Trained as a Unitarian minister, he early forsook his pulpit and ultimately reached a wider audience by pen and platform.
He was a never-failing favorite as a lyceum lecturer and for twenty years took a western tour every winter.
Perhaps his most thrilling public effort was a Phi Beta Kappa address, The American Scholar, delivered at Harvard College in 1837.
This brilliant appeal was an intellectual Declaration of Independence, for it urged American writers to throw off European traditions and delve into the riches of their own backyards.
Hailed as both a poet and a philosopher,  Emerson was not of the highest rank as either.
He was more influential as a practical philosopher and through his fresh and vibrant essays enriched countless thousands of humdrum lives.
Catching the individualistic mood of the Republic,  he stressed self-reliance, self-improvement, selfconfidence, optimism, and freedom.
The secret of Emersons popularity lay largely in the fact that his ideals reflected those of an expanding America.
By the 1850s he was an outspoken critic of slavery, and he ardently supported the Union cause in the Civil War.
Henry David Thoreau (18171862) was Emersons close associatea poet, a mystic, a transcendentalist, and a nonconformist.
Condemning a government that supported slavery, he refused to pay his Massachusetts poll tax and was jailed for a night.
* A gifted prose writer, he is well known for record of Thoreaus two years of simple existence in a hut that he built on the edge of Walden Pond, near Concord, Massachusetts.
A stiff-necked individualist, he believed that he should reduce his bodily wants so as to gain time for a pursuit of truth through study and meditation.
Thoreaus  and his essay  cised a strong influence in furthering idealistic thought, both in America and abroad.
His writings later encouraged Mahatma Gandhi to resist British rule in India and, still later, inspired the development of American civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr.s thinking about nonviolence.
Bold, brassy, and swaggering was the opencollared figure of Brooklyns Walt Whitman (18191892).
In his famous collection of poems ing genius with what he called a barbaric yawp.
Highly romantic, emotional, and unconventional, he dispensed with titles, stanzas, rhymes, and at times even regular meter.
He handled sex with shocking frankness, although he laundered his verses in later editions, and his book was banned in Boston.
Disobedience,  I heartily accept the motto, That government is best which governs least; and I should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systematically.
Carried out, it finally amounts to this, which also I believe That government is best which governs not at all; and when men are prepared for it, that will be the kind of government which they will have.
Government is at best an expedient; but most governments are usually, and all governments are sometimes, inexpedient.
*The story (probably apocryphal) is that Emerson visited Thoreau at the jail and asked, Why are you here?
The reply came, Why are you  Whitmans  failure.
The only three enthusiastic reviews that it received were written by the author himself anonymously.
But in time the once-withered  enormous following in both America and Europe.
His fame increased immensely among Whitmaniacs after his death.
mal title Poet Laureate of Democracy.
Singing  with transcendental abandon of his love for the masses, he caught the exuberant enthusiasm of  an expanding America that had turned its back on the Old World: Here at last was the native art for which critics had been crying.
Certain other literary giants were not actively associated with the transcendentalist movement, though not completely immune to its influences.
Professor Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807 1882), who for many years taught modern languages at Harvard College, was one of the most popular poets ever produced in America.
Handsome and urbane, he lived a generally serene life, except for the tragic deaths of two wives, the second of whom perished before his eyes when her dress caught fire.
Writing for the genteel classes, he was adopted by the less cultured masses.
His wide knowledge of European literature supplied him with C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 so-called poems which were chiefly remarkable for their absurd extravagances and shameless obscenity, and who has since, we are glad to say, been little heard of among decent people.
I had my choice when I commenced.
I bid neither for soft eulogies, big money returns, nor the approbation of existing schools and conventions.
I have had my say entirely my own way, and put it unerringly on record the value thereof to be decided by time.
many themes, but some of his most admired poemsEvangeline, The Song of Hiawatha, and The Courtship of Miles Standishwere based on American traditions.
Immensely popular in Europe, Longfellow was the only American ever to be honored with a bust in the Poets Corner of Westminster Abbey.
A fighting Quaker, John Greenleaf Whittier (18071892), with piercing dark eyes and swarthy complexion, was the uncrowned poet laureate of the antislavery crusade.
Less talented as a writer than Longfellow, he was vastly more important in influencing social action.
His poems cried aloud against inhumanity, injustice, and intolerance, against Undeterred by insults and the stoning of mobs, Whittier helped arouse a calloused America on the slavery issue.
A supreme conscience rather than a sterling poet or intellect, Whittier was one of the moving forces of his generation, whether moral, humanitarian, or spiritual.
Gentle and lovable, he was preeminently the poet of human freedom.
Many-sided Professor James Russell Lowell (18191891), who succeeded Professor Longfellow at Harvard, ranks as one of Americas better poets.
He was also a distinguished essayist, literary critic, editor, and diplomata diffusion of talents that hampered his poetical output.
Lowell is remembered as a political satirist in his  especially those of 1846 dealing with the Mexican War.
Written partly as poetry in the Yankee dialect, the   alleged slavery-expansion designs of the Polk administration.
The scholarly Dr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes (18091894), who taught anatomy with a sparkle at Harvard Medical School, was a prominent poet, essayist, novelist, lecturer, and wit.
A nonconformist and a fascinating conversationalist, he shone among a group of literary lights who regarded Boston as the hub of the universe.
His poem The Last Leaf, in honor of the last white Indian of the Boston Tea Party, came to apply  to himself.
Dying at the age of eighty-five, he  was the last leaf among his distinguished contemporaries.
* Two women writers whose work remains enormously popular today were also tied to this New England literary world.
Louisa May Alcott  (18321888) grew up in Concord, Massachusetts, in the bosom of transcendentalism, alongside neighbors Emerson, Thoreau, and Fuller.
Her philosopher father Bronson Alcott occupied himself more devotedly to ideas than earning a living, leaving his daughter to write  books to support her mother and sisters.
Not far away in Amherst, Massachusetts, poet Emily Dickinson (18301886) lived as a recluse but created her own original world through precious gems of poetry.
In deceptively spare language and simple rhyme schemes, she explored universal themes of *Oliver Wendell Holmes had a son with the same name who became a distinguished justice of the Supreme Court (19021932) and who lived to be ninety-four, less two days.
nature, love, death, and immortality.
Although she refused during her lifetime to publish any of her poems, when she died, nearly two thousand of them were found among her papers and eventually made their way into print.
The most noteworthy literary figure produced by the South before the Civil War, unless Edgar Allan Poe is regarded as a southerner, was novelist William Gilmore Simms (18061870).
Quantitatively, at least, he was great: eighty-two books flowed from his ever-moist pen, winning for  him the title the Cooper of the South.
His  themes dealt with the southern frontier in colonial days and with the South during the Revolutionary War.
But he was neglected by his own section, even though he married into the socially elite and became a slaveowner.
The high-toned planter  aristocracy would never accept the son of a poor Charleston storekeeper.
Not all writers in these years believed so keenly in human goodness and social progress.
Edgar Allan Poe (18091849), who spent much of his youth in Virginia, was an eccentric genius.
Orphaned at an early age, cursed with ill health, and married to a child-wife of thirteen who fell fatally ill of tuberculosis, he suffered hunger, cold, poverty, and debt.
Failing at suicide, he took refuge in the bottle and dissipated his talent early.
Poe was a gifted lyric poet, as The Raven attests.
A master stylist, he also excelled in the short story, especially of the horror type, in which he shared his alcoholic nightmares with fascinated readers.
If he did not invent the modern detective novel, he at least set new high standards in tales like The Gold Bug.
Poe was fascinated by the ghostly and ghastly, as in The Fall of the House of Usher and other stories.
He reflected a morbid sensibility distinctly at odds with the usually optimistic tone of American culture.
Partly for this reason, Poe has perhaps been even more prized by Europeans than by Americans.
His brilliant career was cut short when he was found drunk in a Baltimore gutter and shortly thereafter died.
Two other writers reflected the continuing Calvinist obsession with original sin and with the never-ending struggle between good and evil.
In somber Salem, Massachusetts, writer Nathaniel Hawthorne (18041864) grew up in an atmosphere heavy with the memories of his Puritan forebears and the tragedy of his fathers premature death on an ocean voyage.
His masterpiece was  of forcing an adultress to wear a scarlet A on her clothing.
The tragic tale chronicles the psychological effects of sin on the guilty heroine and her secret lover (the father of her baby), a minister of the gospel in Puritan Boston.
In  (1860), Hawthorne dealt with a group of young American artists who witness a mysterious murder in Rome.
The book explores the concepts of the omnipresence of evil and the dead hand of the past weighing upon the present.
Herman Melville (18191891), an orphaned and ill-educated New Yorker, went to sea as a youth  and served eighteen adventuresome months on a whaler.
A whale ship was my Yale College and my Harvard, he wrote.
Jumping ship in the South Seas, he lived among cannibals, from whom he providently escaped uneaten.
His fresh and charming tales of the South Seas were immediately popular, but his masterpiece,  not.
This epic novel is a complex allegory of good and evil, told in terms of the conflict between a whaling captain, Ahab, and a giant white whale, Moby Dick.
Captain Ahab, having lost a leg to the marine monster, lives only for revenge.
His pursuit finally ends when Moby Dick rams and sinks Ahabs ship, leaving only one survivor.
The whales exact identity and Ahabs motives remain obscure.
In the end the sea, like the terrifyingly impersonal and unknowable universe of Melvilles imagination,  simply rolls on.
its publication; people were accustomed to more straightforward and upbeat prose.
A disheartened Melville continued to write unprofitably for some years, part of the time eking out a living as a customs inspector, and then died in relative obscurity and poverty.
Ironically, his brooding masterpiece about C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 the mysterious white whale had to wait until the more jaded twentieth century for readers and for proper recognition.
A distinguished group of American historians was emerging at the same time that other writers were winning distinction.
Energetic George Bancroft (18001891), who as secretary of the navy helped found the Naval Academy at Annapolis in 1845, has deservedly received the title Father of American History.
He published a spirited, superpatriotic history of the United States to 1789 in six (originally ten) volumes (18341876), a work that grew out of his vast researches in dusty archives in Europe and America.
Two other historians are read with greater  pleasure and profit today.
William H. Prescott  (17961859), who accidentally lost the sight of an eye while in college, conserved his remaining weak vision and published classic accounts of the conquest of Mexico (1843) and Peru (1847).
Francis Parkman (18231893), whose eyes were so defective that he wrote in darkness with the aid of a guiding machine, penned a brilliant series of volumes beginning in 1851.
In epic style he chronicled the struggle between France and Britain in colonial times for the mastery of North America.
Early American historians of prominence were almost without exception New Englanders, largely because the Boston area provided well-stocked libraries and a stimulating literary tradition.
These writers numbered abolitionists among their relatives and friends and hence were disposed to view unsympathetically the slavery-cursed South.
The writing of American history for generations to come was to suffer from an antisouthern bias perpetuated by this early made in New England interpretation.
C HAPTER 15 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 17901860 First Shaker communities formed Thomas Paine publishes  University of North Carolina founded Second Great Awakening begins Jefferson founds University of Virginia Cooper publishes  novel Emma Willard establishes Troy (New York)  Female Seminary New Harmony commune established American Temperance Society founded Noah Webster publishes dictionary American Peace Society founded Joseph Smith founds Mormon Church  Finney conducts revivals in eastern cities Lyceum movement flourishes Oberlin College admits female students Mary Lyon establishes Mount Holyoke  Seminary Emerson delivers The American Scholar  address Brook Farm commune established Dorothea Dix petitions Massachusetts  legislature on behalf of the insane Mormon migration to Utah Seneca Falls Womans Rights Convention  held Oneida Community established Hawthorne publishes  Melville publishes  Maine passes first law prohibiting liquor Whitman publishes  arly chronicles of the antebellum period universally lauded the eras reformers, portraying them as idealistic, altruistic crusaders intent on improving American society.
After World War II, however, some historians began to detect selfish and even conservative motives underlying the apparent benevolence of the reformers.
This view described the advocates of reform as anxious, upper-class men and women threatened by the ferment of life in antebellum America.
The pursuit of reforms like temperance, asylums, prisons, and mandatory public education represented a means of asserting social control.
In this vein, one historian described a reform movement as the anguished protest of an aggrieved class against a world they never made.
In Michael Katzs treatment of early educational reform, proponents were community leaders who sought a school system that would ease the traumas of Americas industrialization by inculcating business-oriented values and discipline in the working classes.
The wave of reform activity in the 1960s prompted a reevaluation of the reputations of the antebellum reformers.
These more recent interpretations found much to admire in the authentic religious commitments of reformers and especially in the participation of women, who sought various social improvements as an extension of their function as protectors of the home and family.
The scholarly treatment of abolitionism is a telling example of how reformers and their campaigns have risen and fallen in the estimation of historians.
To northern historians writing in the late nineteenth century, abolitionists were courageous men and women so devoted to uprooting the evil of slavery that they were willing to dedicate their lives to a cause that often ostracized them from their communities.
By the early twentieth century, however, an interpretation more favorable to the South prevailed, one that blamed the fanaticism of the abolitionists for the Civil War.
But as the racial  climate in the United States began to change by  the mid-twentieth century, historians once again showed sympathy for the abolitionist struggle, and by the 1960s abolitionist men and women were revered as ideologically committed individuals dedicated not just to freeing the enslaved but to saving the moral soul of America.
Recently scholars animated by the modern feminist movement have inspired a reconsideration of womens reform activity.
It had long been known, of course, that women were active participants in charitable organizations.
But not until Nancy Cott, Kathryn Sklar, Mary Ryan, and other historians began to look more closely at what Cott has called the bonds of womanhood did the links between womens domestic lives and their public benevolent behavior fully emerge.
Carroll Smith-Rosenberg showed in her study of the New York Female Moral Reform Society, for example, that members who set out at first to convert prostitutes to evangelical Protestantism and to close down the citys many brothels soon developed an ideology of female autonomy that rejected male dominance.
When men behaved in immoral or illegal ways, women reformers claimed that they had the right even the dutyto leave the confines of their homes and actively work to purify society.
More recently,  historians Nancy Hewitt and Lori Ginzberg have  challenged the assumption that all women reformers embraced a single definition of female identity.
Instead they have emphasized the importance of class differences in shaping womens reform work, which led inevitably to tensions within female ranks.
Giving more attention to the historical evolution of female reform ideology, Ginzberg has also detected a shift from an early focus on moral uplift to a more classbased appeal for social control.
Historians of the suffrage movement have emphasized another kind of exclusivity among women reformersthe boundaries of race.
Ellen DuBois has shown that after a brief alliance with the abolitionist movement, many female suffrage reformers abandoned the cause of black liberation in an effort to achieve their own goal with less controversy.
Whatever historians may conclude about the liberating or leashing character of early reform, it is clear by now that they have to contend with the ways in which class, gender, and race divided reformers, making the plural the more accurate depiction of the impulse to improve that pervaded American society in the early nineteenth century.
For further reading, see page A10 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  T ESTING THE N EW N ATION  18201877 T he Civil War of 1861 to 1865 was the awesome trial by fire of American nationhood, and of the American soul.
All Americans knew, said Abraham Lincoln, that slavery was somehow the cause of this war.
The war tested, in Lincolns ringing phrase at Gettysburg, whether any nation dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal .
can long endure.
How did this great and bloody conflict come about?
And what were its results?
American slavery was by any measure a peculiar institution.
Slavery was rooted in both racism and economic exploitation, and depended for its survival on brutal repression.
Yet the American slave population was the only enslaved population in history that grew by means of its own biological reproductiona fact that suggests to many historians that conditions under slavery in the United States were somehow less punitive than those in other slave societies.
Indeed a distinctive and durable African-American culture managed to flourish under slavery, further suggesting that the slave regime provided some space for African-American cultural development.
But however benignly it might  be painted, slavery still remained a cancer in the heart of American democracy, a moral outrage that mocked the nations claim to be a model of social and political enlightenment.
As time went on, more and more voices called more and more stridently for its abolition.
The nation lived uneasily with slavery from the outset.
Thomas Jefferson was only one among many in the founding generation who felt acutely the conflict between the high principle of equality and the ugly reality of slavery.
The federal government in the early Republic took several steps to check  the growth of slavery.
It banned slavery in the  Old Northwest in 1787, prohibited the further importation of slaves after 1808, and declared in the Missouri Compromise of 1820 that the  vast western territories secured in the Louisiana Purchase were forever closed to slavery north  of the state of Missouri.
Antislavery sentiment even abounded in the South in the immediate post-Revolutionary years.
But as time progressed, and especially after Eli Whitneys invention of the cotton gin in the 1790s, the southern planter class became increasingly dependent on slave labor to wring profits from the sprawling plantations that carpeted the South.
As cotton cultivation spread westward, the Souths stake in slavery grew deeper, and the abolitionist outcry grew louder.
The controversy over slavery significantly intensified following the war with Mexico in the 1840s.
Mexico will poison us, predicted the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, and he proved distressingly prophetic.
The lands acquired from Mexicomost of the present-day American Southwest, from Texas to Californiareopened the question of extending slavery into the western territories.
The decade and a half following the Mexican Warfrom 1846 to 1861witnessed a series of ultimately ineffective efforts to come to grips with that question, including the ill-starred Compromise of 1850, the conflict-breeding KansasNebraska Act of 1854, and the Supreme Courts inflammatory decision in the Dred Scott case  of 1857.
Ultimately, the slavery question was settled by force of arms, in the Civil War itself.
The Civil War, as  Lincoln observed, was assuredly about slavery.
But as Lincoln also repeatedly insisted, the war was about the viability of the Union as well and about the strength of democracy itself.
Could a democratic government, built on the principle of popular consent, rightfully deny some of its citizens the same right to independence that the American revolutionaries had exercised in seceding from the British Empire in 1776?
Southern rebels, calling the conflict The War for Southern Independence, asked that question forcefully, but ultimately it, too, was answered not in the law courts or in the legislative halls but on the battlefield.
The Civil War unarguably established the supremacy of the Union, and it ended slavery as well.
But as the victorious Union set about the task of reconstruction after the wars end in 1865, a combination of weak northern will and residual southern power frustrated the goal of making the emancipated blacks full-fledged American citizens.
The Civil War in the end brought nothing but freedombut over time, freedom proved a powerful tool indeed.
The South and the Slavery Controversy  17931860 R ALPH W ALDO E MERSON , 1841 A t the dawn of the Republic, slavery faced an uncertain future.
Touched by Revolutionary idealism, some southern leaders, including Thomas Jefferson, were talking openly of freeing their slaves.
Others predicted that the iron logic of economics would eventually expose slaverys unprofitability, speeding its demise.
But the introduction of Eli Whitneys cotton gin in 1793 scrambled all those predictions.
Whitneys invention made possible the wide-scale cultivation of short-staple cotton.
The white fiber rapidly became the dominant southern crop, eclipsing tobacco, rice, and sugar.
The explosion of cotton cultivation created an insatiable demand for labor, chaining the slave to the gin, and the planter to the slave.
As the nineteenth century opened, the reinvigoration of southern slavery carried fateful implications for blacks and whites alikeand threatened the survival of the nation itself.
As time passed, the Cotton Kingdom developed into a huge agricultural factory, pouring out avalanches of the fluffy fiber.
Quick profits drew planters to the virgin bottomlands of the Gulf states.
As long as the soil was still vigorous, the yield was bountiful and the rewards were high.
Caught up in an economic spiral, the planters bought more slaves and land to grow more cotton, so as to buy still more slaves and land.
Northern shippers reaped a large part of the profits from the cotton trade.
They would load bulging bales of cotton at southern ports, transport them to England, sell their fleecy cargo for pounds sterling, and buy needed manufactured goods for sale in the United States.
To a large degree, the prosperity of both North and South rested on the bent backs of southern slaves.
Cotton accounted for half the value of all American exports after 1840.
The South produced more than half of the entire worlds supply of cottona fact that held foreign nations in partial bondage.
Britain was then the leading industrial power.
Its most important single manufacture in the 1850s was cotton cloth, from which about one-fifth of its population, directly or indirectly, drew its livelihood.
About 75 percent of this precious supply of fiber came from the white-carpeted acres of the South.
Southern leaders were fully aware that Britain was tied to them by cotton threads, and this dependence gave them a heady sense of power.
In their  eyes Cotton was King, the gin was his throne, and the black bondsmen were his henchmen.
If war should ever break out between North and South, northern warships would presumably cut off the outflow of cotton.
Fiber-famished British factories would then close their gates, starving mobs would force the London government to break the blockade, and the South would triumph.
Cotton was a powerful monarch indeed.
Before the Civil War, the South was in some respects not so much a democracy as an oligarchyor a government by the few, in this case heavily influenced by a planter aristocracy.
In 1850 only 1,733 families owned more than 100 slaves each, and this select group provided the cream of the political and social leadership of the section and nation.
Here was the mint-julep South of the tall-columned and whitepainted plantation mansionthe big house, where dwelt the cottonocracy.
The planter aristocrats, with their blooded horses and Chippendale chairs, enjoyed a lions share of southern wealth.
They could educate their children in the finest schools, often in the North or abroad.
Their money provided the leisure for study, reflection, and statecraft, as was notably true of men like John C. Calhoun (a Yale graduate) and Jefferson Davis (a West Point graduate).
They felt a keen sense of obligation to serve the public.
It was no accident that Virginia and the other southern states produced a higher proportion of front-rank statesmen before 1860 than the dollar-grubbing North.
But even in its best light, dominance by a favored aristocracy was basically undemocratic.
It widened the gap between rich and poor.
It hampered tax-supported public education, because the The whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual exercise of the .
most unremitting despotism on the one part, and degrading submissions on the other.
Indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just; that his justice cannot sleep forever.
rich planters could and did send their children to private institutions.
A favorite author of elite southerners was Sir Walter Scott, whose manors and castles, graced by brave Ivanhoes and fair Rowenas, helped them  idealize a feudal society, even when many of their economic activities were undeniably capitalistic.
Southern aristocrats, who sometimes staged jousting tournaments, strove to perpetuate a type of medievalism that had died out in Europeor was rapidly dying out.
* Mark Twain later accused Sir Walter Scott of having had a hand in starting the Civil War.
The British novelist, Twain said, aroused the southerners to fight for a decaying social structurea sham civilization.
The plantation system also shaped the lives of southern women.
The mistress of a great plantation commanded a sizable household staff of mostly female slaves.
She gave daily orders to cooks, maids, seamstresses, laundresses, and body servants.
Relationships between mistresses and slaves ranged from affectionate to atrocious.
Some mistresses showed tender regard for their bondswomen, and some slave women took pride in their status as members of the household.
But slavery strained even the bonds of womanhood.
Virtually no slaveholding women believed in abolition, and relatively few protested when the husbands and children of their slaves were sold.
One plantation mistress harbored a special affection for her slave Annica but noted in her diary that I whipt Annica for  insolence.
Unhappily, the moonlight-and-magnolia tradition concealed much that was worrisome, distasteful, and sordid.
Plantation agriculture was wasteful, largely because King Cotton and his money-hungry subjects despoiled the good earth.
Quick profits led to excessive cultivation, or land butchery, which in turn caused a heavy leakage of population to the West and Northwest.
The economic structure of the South became increasingly monopolistic.
As the land wore thin, many small farmers sold their holdings to more prosperous neighbors and went north or west.
The big got bigger and the small smaller.
When the Civil War finally erupted, a large percentage of southern farms had passed from the hands of the families that had originally cleared them.
Another cancer in the bosom of the South was the financial instability of the plantation system.
The temptation to overspeculate in land and slaves caused many planters, including Andrew Jackson in C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 *Oddly enough, by legislative enactment, jousting became the official state sport of Maryland in 1962. his later years, to plunge in beyond their depth.
Although the black slaves might in extreme cases be fed for as little as ten cents a day, there were other expenses.
The slaves represented a heavy investment of capital, perhaps $1,200 each in the case of prime field hands, and they might deliberately injure themselves or run away.
An entire slave quarter might be wiped out by disease or even by lightning, as happened in one instance to twenty ill-fated blacks.
Dominance by King Cotton likewise led to a dangerous dependence on a one-crop economy, whose price level was at the mercy of world conditions.
The whole system discouraged a healthy diversification of agriculture and particularly of manufacturing.
Southern planters resented watching the North grow fat at their expense.
They were pained by the heavy outward flow of commissions and interest to northern middlemen, bankers, agents, and shippers.
True souls of the South, especially by the 1850s, deplored the fact that when born, they were wrapped in Yankee-made swaddling clothes and that they spent the rest of their lives in servitude to Yankee manufacturing.
When they died, they were laid in coffins held together with Yankee nails and were buried in graves dug with Yankee shovels.
The South furnished the corpse and the hole in the ground.
The Cotton Kingdom also repelled large-scale European immigration, which added so richly to the manpower and wealth of the North.
In 1860 only 4.4 percent of the southern population were foreignborn, as compared with 18.7 percent for the North.
German and Irish immigration to the South was generally discouraged by the competition of slave labor, by the high cost of fertile land, and by European ignorance of cotton growing.
The diverting of non-British immigration to the North caused the white South to become the most Anglo-Saxon section of the nation.
Only a handful of southern whites lived in  Grecianpillared mansions.
Below those 1,733 families in 1850 who owned a hundred or more slaves were  the less wealthy slaveowners.
They totaled in 1850 some 345,000 families, representing about 1,725,000 white persons.
Over two-thirds of these families 255,268 in allowned fewer than ten slaves each.
All told, only about one-fourth of white southerners owned slaves or belonged to a slaveowning family.
The smaller slaveowners did not own a majority of the slaves, but they made up a majority of the masters.
These lesser masters were typically small All day and almost all night long, the captain, pilot, crew, and passengers were talking of nothing else; and sometimes our ears were so wearied with the sound of cotton!
cotton!
cotton!
that we gladly hailed a fresh inundation of company in hopes of some changebut alas!
Whats cotton at?
was the first eager inquiry.
Ten cents [a pound ], Oh, that will never do!
1,733 own     6,196 own                        29,733 own                                           54,595 own                                                                  80,765 own                                                                                     105,683 own                                                        68,820 own  Slaveowning Families, 1850 More than half of all slaveholding families owned fewer than four slaves.
In contrast, 2 percent of slaveowners owned more than fifty slaves each.
A tiny slaveholding elite held a majority of slave property in the South.
The great majority of white southerners owned no slaves at all.
farmers.
With the striking exception that their household contained a slave or two, or perhaps an entire slave family, the style of their lives probably resembled that of small farmers in the North more than it did that of the southern planter aristocracy.
They lived in modest farmhouses and sweated beside their bondsmen in the cotton fields, laboring callus for callus just as hard as their slaves.
Beneath the slaveowners on the population pyramid was the great body of whites who owned no C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 Baton       Rouge New Orleans Mobile Jackson Birmingham Macon Augusta Savannah Charleston Columbia Raleigh Richmond Nashville Memphis TEXAS (Spanish) MISSOURI   TERR.
ARKANSAS   TERR.
ILL.
TENN.
FLA.
TERR.
S.C.
N.C.
MISS.
ALA.
IND.
Southern cotton production, 1820 Major production areas Other production areas Baton       Rouge New Orleans Mobile Jackson Birmingham Macon Augusta Savannah Charleston Columbia Raleigh Richmond Nashville Memphis TEXAS MO.
KANS.
ARK.
INDIAN TERR.
ILL.
TENN.
FLA.
S.C.
N.C.
MISS.
ALA.
IND.
Southern cotton production, 1860 Major production areas Other production areas Southern Cotton Production, 1820 Southern Cotton Production, 1860 slaves at all.
By 1860 their numbers had swelled to 6,120,825three-quarters of all southern whites.
Shouldered off the richest bottomlands by the mighty planters, they scratched a simple living from the thinner soils of the backcountry and the mountain valleys.
To them, the riches of the Cotton Kingdom were a distant dream, and they often sneered at the lordly pretensions of the cotton snobocracy.
These rednecked farmers participated in the market economy scarcely at all.
As subsistence farmers, they raised Distribution of Slaves, 1820  The philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, a New Englander, declared in 1856, I do not see how a barbarous community and a civilized community can constitute a state.
I think we must get rid of slavery or we must get rid of freedom.
Distribution of Slaves, 1860 corn and hogs, not cotton, and often lived isolated lives, punctuated periodically by extended socializing and sermonizing at religious camp meetings.
Some of the least prosperous nonslaveholding whites were scorned even by slaves as poor white trash.
Known also as hillbillies, crackers, or clay eaters, they were often described as listless, shiftless, and misshapen.
Later investigations have revealed that many of them were not simply lazy  but sick, suffering from malnutrition and parasites, especially hookworm.
All these whites without slaves had no direct stake in the preservation of slavery, yet they were among the stoutest defenders of the slave system.
Why?
The answer is not far to seek.
The carrot on the stick ever dangling before their eyes was the hope of buying a slave or two and of parlaying their paltry holdings into richesall in accord with the American dream of upward social mobility.
They also took fierce pride in their presumed racial superiority, which would be watered down if the slaves were freed.
Many of the poorer whites were hardly better off economically than the slaves; some, indeed, were not so well-off.
But even the most wretched whites could take perverse  comfort from the knowledge that they outranked someone in status: the still more wretched AfricanAmerican slave.
Thus did the logic of economics join with the illogic of racism in buttressing the slave system.
In a special category among white southerners were the mountain whites, more or less marooned in the valleys of the Appalachian range that stretched from western Virginia to northern Georgia and Alabama.
Civilization had largely passed them by, and they still lived under spartan frontier conditions.
They were a kind of living ancestry, for some of them retained Elizabethan speech forms and habits that had long since died out in Britain.
As independent small farmers, hundreds of miles distant from the heart of the Cotton Kingdom and rarely if ever in sight of a slave, these mountain whites had little in common with the whites of the flatlands.
Many of them, including future president Andrew Johnson of Tennessee, hated both the haughty planters and their gangs of blacks.
They looked upon the impending strife between North and South as a rich mans war but a poor mans fight.
When the war came, the tough-fibered mountain whites constituted a vitally important peninsula of Unionism jutting down into the secessionist Southern sea.
They ultimately played a significant role in crippling the Confederacy.
Their attachment to the Union party of Abraham Lincoln was such that for generations after the Civil War, the only concentrated Republican strength in the solid South was to be found in the southern highlands.
Precarious in the extreme was the standing of the Souths free blacks, who numbered about 250,000 by 1860.
In the upper South, the free black population traced its origins to a wavelet of emancipation inspired by the idealism of Revolutionary days.
In the deeper South, many free blacks were mulattoes, usually the emancipated children of a white planter and his black mistress.
Throughout the South were some free blacks who had purchased their freedom with earnings from labor after hours.
Many free blacks owned property, especially in New Orleans, where a sizable mulatto community prospered.
Some, such as William T. Johnson, the barber of Natchez, even owned slaves.
He was the master of fifteen bondsmen; his diary records that in June 1848 he flogged two slaves and a mule.
The free blacks in the South were a kind of third race.
These people were prohibited from working in certain occupations and forbidden from testifying against whites in court.
They were always vulnerable to being highjacked back into slavery  by unscrupulous slave traders.
As free men and women, they were walking examples of what might be achieved by emancipation and hence were C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 He therefore most respectfully and earnestly prays that you will pass a law permitting him on the score of long and meritorious service to remain in the State, together with his wife and four children, and not force him in his old age to seek a livelihood in a new Country.
resented and detested by defenders of the slave  system.
Free blacks were also unpopular in the North, where about another 250,000 of them lived.
Several states forbade their entrance, most denied them the right to vote, and some barred blacks from public schools.
In 1835 New Hampshire farmers hitched their oxen to a small schoolhouse that had dared to enroll fourteen black children and dragged it into a swamp.
Northern blacks were especially hated by the pick-and-shovel Irish immigrants, with whom they competed for menial jobs.
Much of the agitation in the North against the spread of slavery into the new territories in the 1840s and 1850s grew out of race prejudice, not humanitarianism.
Antiblack feeling was in fact frequently stronger in the North than in the South.
The gifted and eloquent former slave Frederick Douglass, an abolitionist and self-educated orator of rare power, was several times mobbed and beaten by northern rowdies.
It was sometimes observed that white southerners, who were often suckled and reared by black nurses, liked the black as an individual but despised the race.
The white northerner, on the other hand, often professed to like the race but disliked individual blacks.
In societys basement in the South of 1860 were nearly 4 million black human chattels.
Their numbers had quadrupled since the dawn of the century, as the booming cotton economy created a seemingly unquenchable demand for slave labor.
Legal importation of African slaves into America ended in 1808, when Congress outlawed slave imports.
But the price of black ivory was so high in the years before the Civil War that uncounted thousands of blacks were smuggled into the South, despite the death penalty for slavers.
Although several were captured, southern juries repeatedly acquitted them.
Only one slave trader was ever executed, N. P. Gordon, and this took place in New York in 1862, the second year of the Civil War.
Yet the huge bulk of the increase in the slave population came not from imports but instead from natural reproductiona fact that distinguished slavery in America from other New World societies and that implied much about the tenor of the slave regime and the conditions of family life under slavery.
Above all, the planters regarded the slaves  as investments, into which they had sunk nearly  $2 billion of their capital by 1860.
Slaves were the primary form of wealth in the South, and as such they were cared for as any asset is cared for by a prudent capitalist.
Accordingly, they were sometimes, though by no means always, spared dangerous work, like putting a roof on a house.
If a neck was going to be broken, the master preferred it to be that of a wage-earning Irish laborer rather than that of a prime field hand, worth $1,800 by 1860 (a price that had quintupled since 1800).
Tunnel blasting and swamp draining were often consigned to itinerant gangs of expendable Irishmen because those perilous tasks were death on niggers and mules.
Slavery was profitable for the great planters, though it hobbled the economic development of the region as a whole.
The profits from the cotton boom sucked ever more slaves from the upper to the lower South, so that by 1860 the Deep South states of South Carolina, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana each had a majority or near-majority of blacks and accounted for about half of all slaves in the South.
Breeding slaves in the way that cattle are bred was not openly encouraged.
But thousands of blacks from the soil-exhausted slave states of the Old South, especially tobacco-depleted Virginia, were sold down the river to toil as field-gang laborers on the cotton frontier of the lower Mississippi Valley.
Women who bore thirteen or fourteen babies were prized as rattlin good breeders, and some of these fecund females were promised their freedom when they had produced ten.
White masters all too frequently would force their attentions on female slaves, fathering a sizable mulatto population, most of which remained enchained.
Slave auctions were brutal sights.
The open selling of human flesh under the hammer, sometimes C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 with cattle and horses, was among the most revolting aspects of slavery.
On the auction block, families were separated with distressing frequency, usually for economic reasons such as bankruptcy or the division of property among heirs.
The sundering of families in this fashion was perhaps slaverys greatest psychological horror.
Abolitionists decried the practice, and Harriet Beecher Stowe seized on the emotional power of this theme by putting it at the heart of the plot of  White southerners often romanticized about  the happy life of their singing, dancing, banjostrumming, joyful darkies.
But how did the slaves actually live?
There is no simple answer to this question.
Conditions varied greatly from region to region, from large plantation to small farm, and from master to master.
Everywhere, of course, slavery meant hard work, ignorance, and oppression.
The slavesboth men and womenusually toiled from dawn to dusk in the fields, under the watchful eyes and ready whip-hand of a white overseer or black driver.
They had no civil or political rights, other than minimal protection from arbitrary murder or unusually cruel punishment.
Some states offered further protections, such as banning the sale of a child under the age of ten away from his or her mother.
But all such laws were difficult to enforce, since slaves were forbidden to testify in court or even to have their marriages legally recognized.
Floggings were common, for the whip was the substitute for the wage-incentive system and the most visible symbol of the planters mastery.
Strongwilled slaves were sometimes sent to breakers, whose technique consisted mostly in lavish laying I write you a letter to let you know of my distress my master has sold albert to a trader on Monday court day and myself and other child is for sale also and I want you to let hear from you very soon before next cort if you can I dont know when I dont want you to wait till Christmas I want you to tell Dr Hamelton and your master if either will buy me they can attend to it know and then I can go after-wards I dont want a trader to get me they asked me if I had got any person to buy me and I told them no they took me to the court houste too they never put me up a man buy the name of brady bought albert and is gone I dont know whare they say he lives in Scottesville my things is in several places some is in staunton and if I should be sold I dont know what will become of them I dont expect to meet with the luck to get that way till I am quite heart sick nothing more I am and ever will be your kind wife Maria Perkins.
on of the lash.
As an abolitionist song of the 1850s lamented, But savage beatings made sullen laborers, and lash marks hurt resale values.
There are, to be sure, sadistic monsters in any population, and the planter class contained its share.
But the typical planter had too much of his own prosperity riding on the backs of his slaves to beat them bloody on a regular basis.
By 1860 most slaves were concentrated in the black belt of the Deep South that stretched from South Carolina and Georgia into the new southwest states of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
This was the region of the southern frontier, into which the explosively growing Cotton Kingdom had burst in a few short decades.
As on all frontiers, life was often rough and raw, and in general the lot of the slave was harder here than in the more settled areas of the Old South.
A majority of blacks lived on larger plantations that harbored communities of twenty or more slaves.
In some counties of the Deep South, especially along the lower Mississippi River, blacks accounted for more than 75 percent of the population.
There the family life of slaves tended to be relatively stable, and a distinctive African-American slave culture developed.
Forced separations of spouses, parents, and children were evidently more common on smaller plantations and in the Upper South.
Slave marriage vows sometimes proclaimed, Until death or  With impressive resilience, blacks managed to sustain family life in slavery, and most slaves were raised in stable two-parent households.
Continuity of family identity across generations was evidenced in the widespread practice of naming children for grandparents or adopting the surname not of a  current master, but of a forebears master.
AfricanAmericans also displayed their African cultural roots when they avoided marriage between first cousins, in contrast to the frequent intermarriage of close relatives among the ingrown planter aristocracy.
C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 The sugar-growing Bellegrove Plantationon the banks of the Mississippi River ninetyfive miles north of New Orleanswas laid out on a grander scale than many southern plantations.
In this rendering from an advertisement for Bellegroves sale in 1867, the planter John Orrs home was identified as a mansion and quarters for his field hands proved extensive: twenty doublecabins built for slaves, now for Negroes, and a dormitory, described in the ad but not pictured here, housing one hundred and fifty laborers.
Because of the unhealthy work involved in cultivating sugar cane, such as constant digging of drainage canals to keep the cane from rotting in standing water, many planters hired immigrant usually Irishlabor to keep their valuable slaves out of physical danger.
The presence of a hospital between the slave cabins and the mansion indicates the very real threat to health.
The layout of Bellegrove reflects the organization of production as well as the social relations on a sugar plantation.
The storehouse where preserved sugar awaited shipping stood closest to the Mississippi River, the principal transportation route, whereas the sugar house, the most important building on the plantation with its mill, boilers, and cooking vats for converting syrup into sugar, dominated the cane fields.
Although the big house and slave quarters stood in close proximity, hedges surrounding the planters home shut out views of both sugar production and labor.
Within the slave quarters, the overseers larger house signified his superior status, while the arrangement of cabins ensured his supervision of domestic as well as work life.
What else does the physical layout of the plantation reveal about settlement patterns, sugar cultivation, and social relationships along the Mississippi?
African roots were also visible in the slaves religious practices.
Though heavily Christianized by the itinerant evangelists of the Second Great Awakening, blacks in slavery molded their own distinctive religious forms from a mixture of Christian and African elements.
They emphasized those aspects of the Christian heritage that seemed most pertinent to their own situationespecially the captivity of the Israelites in Egypt.
One of their most haunting spirituals implored,  And another lamented, African practices also persisted in the responsorial style of preaching, in which the congregation frequently punctuates the ministers remarks with assents and amensan adaptation of the give-andtake between caller and dancers in the African ringshout dance.
Slavery was intolerably degrading to the victims.
They were deprived of the dignity and sense of responsibility that come from independence and the right to make choices.
They were denied an education, because reading brought ideas, and ideas brought discontent.
Many states passed laws forbidding their instruction, and perhaps nine-tenths of adult slaves at the beginning of the Civil War were totally illiterate.
For all slavesindeed for virtually all blacks, slave or freethe American dream of bettering ones lot through study and hard work was a cruel and empty mockery.
Not surprisingly, victims of the peculiar institution devised countless ways to throw sand in its gears.
When workers are not voluntarily hired and adequately compensated, they can hardly be expected to work with alacrity.
Accordingly, slaves often slowed the pace of their labor to the barest minimum that would spare them the lash, thus fostering the myth of black laziness in the minds of whites.
They filched food from the big house and pilfered other goods that had been produced or  purchased by their labor.
They sabotaged expensive equipment, stopping the work routine altogether until repairs were accomplished.
Occasionally they even poisoned their masters food.
The slaves also universally pined for freedom.
Many took to their heels as runaways, frequently in search of a separated family member.
A black girl, asked if her mother was dead, replied, Yassah, massah, she is daid, but shes free.
Others rebelled, though never successfully.
In 1800 an armed insurrection led by a slave named Gabriel in Richmond, Virginia, was foiled by informers, and its leaders were hanged.
Denmark Vesey, a free black, led another ill-fated rebellion in Charleston in 1822.
Also betrayed by informers, Vesey and more than thirty followers were publicly strung from the gallows.
In 1831 the semiliterate Nat Turner, a visionary black preacher, led an uprising that slaughtered about sixty Virginians, mostly women and children.
Reprisals were swift and bloody.
The dark taint of slavery also left its mark on the whites.
It fostered the brutality of the whip, the bloodhound, and the branding iron.
White southerners increasingly lived in a state of imagined siege, surrounded by potentially rebellious blacks inflamed by abolitionist propaganda from the North.
Their fears bolstered an intoxicating theory of biological racial superiority and turned the South into a reactionary backwater in an era of progress one of the last bastions of slavery in the Western world.
The defenders of slavery were forced to degrade themselves, along with their victims.
As Booker T. Washington, a distinguished black leader and former slave, later observed, whites could not hold blacks in a ditch without getting down there with them.
The inhumanity of the peculiar institution gradually caused antislavery societies to sprout forth.
Abolitionist sentiment first stirred at the time of the Revolution, especially among Quakers.
Because of the widespread loathing of blacks, some of the earliest abolitionist efforts focused on transporting the blacks bodily back to Africa.
The American Colonization Society was founded for this purpose in 1817, and in 1822 the Republic of Liberia, on the fever-stricken West African coast, was established for former slaves.
Its capital, Monrovia, was named after President Monroe.
Some C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 fifteen thousand freed blacks were transported there over the next four decades.
But most blacks had no wish to be transplanted into a strange civilization after having become partially Americanized.
By 1860 virtually all southern slaves were no longer Africans, but native-born African-Americans, with their own distinctive history and culture.
Yet the colonization idea appealed to some antislaveryites, including Abraham Lincoln, until the time of the Civil War.
In the 1830s the abolitionist movement took on new energy and momentum, mounting to the proportions of a crusade.
American abolitionists took heart in 1833 when their British counterparts unchained the slaves in the West Indies.
Most important, the religious spirit of the Second Great Awakening now inflamed the hearts of many abolitionists against the sin of slavery.
Prominent among them was lanky, tousle-haired Theodore Dwight Weld, who had been evangelized by Charles Grandison Finney in New Yorks Burned-Over District in the 1820s.
Selfeducated and simple in manner and speech, Weld appealed with special power and directness to his rural audiences of untutored farmers.
Spiritually inspired by Finney, Weld was materially aided by two wealthy and devout New York merchants, the brothers Arthur and Lewis Tappan.
In 1832 they paid his way to Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio, which was presided over by the formidable Lyman Beecher, father of a remarkable brood, including novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe, reformer Catharine Beecher, and preacher-abolitionist Henry Ward Beecher.
Expelled along with several other students in 1834 for organizing an eighteen-day debate on slavery, Weld and his fellow Lane Rebelsfull of the energy and idealism of youthfanned out across the Old Northwest preaching the antislavery gospel.
Humorless and deadly earnest, Weld also assembled a potent propaganda pamphlet,  (1839).
Its compelling arguments made it among  the most effective abolitionist tracts and greatly influenced Harriet Beecher Stowes  (Slavery prohibited by Ordinance of 1787) OLD NORTHWEST THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE, 1803 SLAVE STATES PA.
1780 N.J.
1804 N.Y.
1799 N.H.
1783 MASS.
1780  MASS.
1780 CONN.
1784  R.I.
1784 1777 VT.
By state constitution By state statutes in force (gradual emancipation) Early Emancipation in the North On New Years Day, 1831, a shattering abolitionist blast came from the bugle of William Lloyd Garrison, a mild-looking reformer of twenty-six.
The emotionally high-strung son of a drunken father and a spiritual child of the Second Great Awakening, Garrison published in Boston the first issue of his militantly antislavery newspaper  this mighty paper broadside, Garrison triggered a thirty-year war of words and in a sense fired one of the opening barrages of the Civil War.
Stern and uncompromising, Garrison nailed his colors to the masthead of his weekly.
He proclaimed in strident tones that under no circumstances would he tolerate the poisonous weed of slavery but would stamp it out at once, root and branch: I will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
I am in earnestI will not equivocateI will not excuseI will not retreat a single inchand I WILL BE HEARD!
Other dedicated abolitionists rallied to Garrisons standard, and in 1833 they founded the American Anti-Slavery Society.
Prominent among them was Wendell Phillips, a Boston patrician known as abolitions golden trumpet.
A man of strict principle, he would eat no cane sugar and wear no cotton cloth, since both were produced by southern slaves.
Black abolitionists distinguished themselves  as living monuments to the cause of African-American freedom.
Their ranks included David Walker, whose incendiary   supremacy.
Also noteworthy were Sojourner Truth, a freed black woman in New York who fought tirelessly for black emancipation and womens rights, and Martin Delaney, one of the few black leaders to take seriously the notion of mass recolonization of Africa.
In 1859 he visited West Africas Niger Valley seeking a suitable site for relocation.
C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 The greatest of the black abolitionists was Frederick Douglass.
Escaping from bondage in 1838 at the age of twenty-one, he was discovered by the abolitionists in 1841 when he gave a stunning impromptu speech at an antislavery meeting in Massachusetts.
Thereafter he lectured widely for the cause, despite frequent beatings and threats against his life.
In 1845 he published his classic autobiography,  able origins as the son of a black slave woman and a white father, his struggle to learn to read and write, and his eventual escape to the North.
Douglass was as flexibly practical as Garrison was stubbornly principled.
Garrison often appeared to be more interested in his own righteousness than in the substance of the slavery evil itself.
He repeatedly demanded that the virtuous North secede from the wicked South.
Yet he did not explain how the creation of an independent slave republic would bring an end to the damning crime of slavery.
Renouncing politics, on the Fourth of July, 1854, he publicly burned a copy of the Constitution as a covenant with death and an agreement with hell (a phrase he borrowed from a Shaker condemnation  of marriage).
Critics, including some of his former supporters, charged that Garrison was cruelly probing the moral wound in Americas underbelly but offering no acceptable balm to ease the pain.
Douglass, on the other hand, along with other abolitionists, increasingly looked to politics to end At this addition to the human stock Covey and his wife were ecstatic with joy.
No one dreamed of reproaching the woman or finding fault with the hired man, Bill Smith, the father of the children, for Mr.
Covey himself had locked the two up together every night, thus inviting the result.
[T]here is but one opinion of him.
Wherever he goes he arouses sympathy in your cause and love for himself.
Our expectations were highly roused by his narrative, his printed speeches, and the eulogisms of the friends with whom he has been staying: but he far exceeds the picture we had formed both in outward graces, intellectual power and culture, and eloquence.
* *From Clare Taylor, ed.,  Press, 1974), p.
282. the blight of slavery.
These political abolitionists backed the Liberty party in 1840, the Free Soil party in 1848, and eventually the Republican party in the 1850s.
In the end, most abolitionists, including even the pacifistic Garrison himself, followed out the logic of their beliefs and supported a frightfully costly fratricidal war as the price of emancipation.
High-minded and courageous, the abolitionists were men and women of goodwill and various colors who faced the cruel choice that people in many ages have had thrust upon them: when is evil so enormous that it must be denounced, even at the risk of precipitating bloodshed and butchery?
Antislavery sentiment was not unknown in the South, and in the 1820s antislavery societies were more numerous south of the Mason-Dixon line* than north of it.
But after about 1830, the voice of white southern abolitionism was silenced.
In a last gasp of southern questioning of slavery, the Virginia legislature debated and eventually defeated various emancipation proposals in 18311832.
That debate marked a turning point.
Thereafter all the slave states tightened their slave codes and moved to prohibit emancipation of any kind, voluntary or compensated.
Nat Turners rebellion in 1831 sent a wave of hysteria sweeping over the snowy cotton fields, and planters in growing numbers slept with pistols by their pillows.
Although Garrison had no demonstrable connection with the Turner conspiracy, his was bitterly condemned as a terrorist and an inciter of murder.
The state of Georgia offered $5,000 for his arrest and conviction.
The nullification crisis of 1832 further implanted haunting fears in white southern minds, conjuring up nightmares of black incendiaries and abolitionist devils.
Jailings, whippings, and lynchings now greeted rational efforts to discuss the slavery problem in the South.
Proslavery whites responded by launching a massive defense of slavery as a positive good.
In doing so, they forgot their own sections previous doubts about the morality of the peculiar institution.
Slavery, they claimed, was supported by the authority of the Bible and the wisdom of Aristotle.
It was good for the Africans, who were lifted from the barbarism of the jungle and clothed with the blessings of Christian civilization.
Slavemasters did indeed encourage religion in the slave quarters.
A catechism for blacks contained such passages as, Q .
White apologists also pointed out that masterslave relationships really resembled those of a family.
On many plantations, especially those of the Old South of Virginia and Maryland, this argument had a certain plausibility.
A slaves tombstone bore this touching inscription: JOHN : Southern whites were quick to contrast the happy lot of their servants with that of the overworked northern wage slaves, including sweated women and stunted children.
The blacks mostly toiled in the fresh air and sunlight, not in dark and stuffy factories.
They did not have to worry about slack times or unemployment, as did the hired hands of the North.
Provided with a jail-like form of Social Security, they were cared for in sickness and old age, unlike northern workers, who were set adrift when they had outlived their usefulness.
These curious proslavery arguments only widened the chasm between a backward-looking South and a forward-looking Northand indeed much of the rest of the Western world.
The southerners reacted defensively to the pressure of their own fears and bristled before the merciless nagging of the northern abolitionists.
Increasingly the white South turned in upon itself and grew hotly intolerant of any embarrassing questions about the status of slavery.
C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 *Originally the southern boundary of colonial Pennsylvania.
Regrettably, also, the controversy over free people endangered free speech in the entire country.
Piles of petitions poured in upon Congress from the antislavery reformers, and in 1836 sensitive southerners drove through the House the so-called Gag Resolution.
It required all such antislavery appeals to be tabled without debate.
This attack on the right of petition aroused the sleeping lion in the aged expresident, Representative John Quincy Adams, and he waged a successful eight-year fight for its repeal.
Southern whites likewise resented the flooding of their mails with incendiary abolitionist literature.
Even if blacks could not read, they could interpret the inflammatory drawings, such as those that showed masters knocking out slaves teeth with clubs.
In 1835 a mob in Charleston, South Carolina, looted the post office and burned a pile of abolitionist propaganda.
Capitulating to southern pressures, the Washington government in 1835 ordered southern postmasters to destroy abolitionist material and called on southern state officials to arrest federal postmasters who did not comply.
Such was freedom of the press as guaranteed by the Constitution.
Abolitionistsespecially the extreme Garrisonianswere for a long time unpopular in many parts of the North.
Northerners had been brought up to revere the Constitution and to regard the clauses on slavery as a lasting bargain.
The ideal of Union, hammered home by the thundering eloquence of Daniel Webster and others, had taken deep root, and Garrisons wild talk of secession grated harshly on northern ears.
The North also had a heavy economic stake in Dixieland.
By the late 1850s, the southern planters owed northern bankers and other creditors about $300 million, and much of this immense sum would be lostas, in fact, it later wasshould the Union dissolve.
New England textile mills were fed with cotton raised by the slaves, and a disrupted labor system might cut off this vital supply and bring unemployment.
The Union during these critical years was partly bound together with cotton threads, tied by lords of the loom in collaboration with the socalled lords of the lash.
It was not surprising that strong hostility developed in the North against the boat-rocking tactics of the radical antislaveryites.
Repeated tongue-lashings by the extreme abolitionists provoked many mob outbursts in the North, some led by respectable gentlemen.
A gang of young toughs broke into Lewis Tappans New York house in 1834 and demolished its interior, while a crowd in the street cheered.
In 1835 Garrison, with a rope tied around him, was dragged through the streets of Boston by the so-called Broadcloth Mob but escaped almost miraculously.
Reverend Elijah P. Lovejoy, of Alton, Illinois, not content to assail slavery, impugned the chastity of Catholic women.
His printing press was destroyed four times, and in 1837 he was killed by a mob and became the martyr abolitionist.
So unpopular were the antislavery zealots that ambitious politicians, like Lincoln, usually avoided the taint of Garrisonian abolition like the plague.
Yet by the 1850s the abolitionist outcry had made a deep dent in the northern mind.
Many citizens had come to see the South as the land of the unfree and the home of a hateful institution.
Few northerners were prepared to abolish slavery outright, but a growing number, including Lincoln, opposed extending it to the western territories.
People of this stamp, commonly called free-soilers, swelled their ranks as the Civil War approached.
C HAPTER 16 The South and the Slavery Controversy, 17931860 Whitneys cotton gin transforms southern  economy Gabriel slave rebellion in Virginia Congress outlaws slave trade American Colonization Society formed Missouri Compromise Vesey slave rebellion in Charleston Republic of Liberia established in Africa Walker publishes  Nat Turner slave rebellion in Virginia Garrison begins publishing  Virginia legislature debates slavery and  emancipation British abolish slavery in the West Indies American Anti-Slavery Society founded Abolitionist students expelled from Lane  Theological Seminary U.S.
Post Office orders destruction of  abolitionist mail Broadcloth Mob attacks Garrison House of Representatives passes Gag  Resolution Mob kills abolitionist Lovejoy in Alton,  Illinois Weld publishes  Liberty party organized Douglass publishes  Free Soil party organized y the early twentieth century, the predictable accounts of slavery written by partisans of the North or South had receded in favor of a romantic vision of the Old South conveyed through popular literature, myth, and, increasingly, scholarship.
That vision was persuasively validated by the publication of Ulrich Bonnell Phillipss landmark study,  arguments.
First, he claimed that slavery was a dying economic institution, unprofitable to the slaveowner and an obstacle to the economic development of the South as a whole.
Second, he contended that slavery was a rather benign institution and that the planters, contrary to abolitionist charges of ruthless exploitation, treated their chattels with kindly paternalism.
Third, he reflected the dominant racial attitudes of his time in his belief that blacks were inferior and submissive by nature and did not abhor the institution that enslaved them.
For nearly a century, historians have debated these assertions, sometimes heatedly.
More sophisticated economic analysis has refuted Phillipss claim that slavery would have withered away without a war.
Economic historians have demonstrated that slavery was a viable, profitable, expanding economic system and that slaves constituted a worthwhile investment for their owners.
The price of a prime field hand rose dramatically, even in the 1850s.
No such definitive conclusion has yet been reached in the disputes over slave treatment.
Beginning in the late 1950s, historians came increasingly to emphasize the harshness of the slave system.
One study, Stanley Elkinss  to compare the peculiar institution to the Nazi concentration camps of World War II.
Both were total institutions, Elkins contended, which infantilized their victims.
More recently, scholars such as Eugene Genovese have moved beyond debating whether slavery was kind or cruel.
Without diminishing the deprivations and pains of slavery, Genovese has conceded that slavery embraced a strange form of paternalism, a system that reflected not the benevolence of southern slaveholders, but their need to control and coax work out of their reluctant and often recalcitrant investments.
Furthermore, within this paternalist system, black slaves were able to make reciprocal demands of their white owners and to protect a cultural space of their own in which family and religion particularly could flourish.
The crowning paradox of slaveholder paternalism was that in treating their property more humanely, slaveowners implicitly recognized the humanity of their slaves and thereby subverted the racist underpinnings upon which their slave society existed.
The revised conceptions of the master-slave relationship also spilled over into the debate about slave personality.
Elkins accepted Phillipss portrait of the slave as a childlike Sambo but saw it as a consequence of slavery rather than a congenital attribute of African-Americans.
Kenneth Stampp, rejecting the Sambo stereotype, stressed the frequency and variety of slave resistance, both mild and militant.
A third view, imaginatively documented in the work of Lawrence Levine, argues that the Sambo character was an act, an image that slaves used to confound their masters without incurring punishment.
Levines  John Blassingame and Herbert Gutman an emphasis on the tenacity with which slaves maintained their own culture and kin relations, despite the hardships of bondage.
Most recently, historians have attempted to avoid the polarity of repression versus autonomy.
They assert the debasing oppression of slavery, while also acknowledging slaves ability to resist the dehumanizing effects of enslavement.
The challenge before historians today is to capture the vibrancy of slave culture and its legacy for African-American society after emancipation, without diminishing the brutality of life under the southern slave regime.
A new sensitivity to gender, spurred by the growing field of womens history, has also expanded the horizons of slavery studies.
Historians such  as Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, Jacqueline Jones, and Catherine Clinton have focused on the ways in which slavery differed for men and women, both slaves and slaveholders.
Enslaved black women, for example, had the unique task of negotiating an identity out of their dual responsibilities as plantation laborer, even sometimes caretaker of white women and children, and anchor of the black family.
By tracing the interconnectedness of race and gender in the American South, these historians have also shown how slavery shaped conceptions of masculinity and femininity within southern society, further distinguishing its culture from that of the North.
For further reading, see page A11 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy  18411848 J OHN L. OS ULLIVAN , 1845* T erritorial expansion dominated American diplomacy and politics in the 1840s.
Settlers swarming into the still-disputed Oregon Country aggravated relations with Britain, which had staked its own claims in the Pacific Northwest.
The clamor to annex Texas to the Union provoked bitter tension with Mexico, which continued to regard Texas as a Mexican province in revolt.
And when Americans began casting covetous eyes on Mexicos northernmost province, the great prize of California, open warfare erupted between the United States and its southern neighbor.
Victory over Mexico added vast new domains to the United States, but it also raised thorny questions about the status of slavery in the newly acquired territoriesquestions that would be answered in blood in the Civil War of the 1860s.
A horde of hard-ciderites descended upon Washington early in 1841, clamoring for the spoils of office.
Newly elected President Harrison, bewildered by the uproar, was almost hounded to death by Whig spoilsmen.
The real leaders of the Whig party regarded Old Tippecanoe as little more than an impressive figurehead.
Daniel Webster, as secretary of state, and Henry Clay, the uncrowned king of the Whigs and their ablest spokesman in the Senate, would grasp the helm.
The aging general was finally forced to rebuke the overzealous Clay and pointedly remind him that he, William Henry Harrison, was president of the United States.
Unluckily for Clay and Webster, their schemes soon hit a fatal snag.
Before the new term had fairly started, Harrison contracted pneumonia.
Wearied *Earliest known use of the term  called Manifest Desire.
by official functions and plagued by office seekers, the enfeebled old warrior died after only four weeks in the White Houseby far the shortest administration in American history, following by far the longest inaugural address.
The Tyler too part of the Whig ticket, hitherto only a rhyme, now claimed the spotlight.
What manner of man did the nation now find in the presidential chair?
Six feet tall, slender, blue-eyed, and fair-haired, with classical features and a high forehead, John Tyler was a Virginia gentleman of the old schoolgracious and kindly, yet stubbornly attached to principle.
He had earlier resigned from the Senate, quite unnecessarily, rather than accept distasteful instructions from the Virginia legislature.
Still a lone wolf, he had forsaken the Jacksonian Democratic fold for that of the Whigs, largely because he could not stomach the dictatorial tactics of Jackson.
Tylers enemies accused him of being a Democrat in Whig clothing, but this charge was only partially true.
The Whig party, like the Democratic party, was something of a catchall, and the accidental president belonged to the minority wing, which embraced a number of Jeffersonian states righters.
Tyler had in fact been put on the ticket partly to attract the vote of this fringe group, many of whom were  influential southern gentry.
Yet Tyler, high-minded as he was, should never have consented to run on the ticket.
Although the dominant Clay-Webster group had published no platform, every alert politician knew what the unpublished platform contained.
And on virtually every major issue, the obstinate Virginian was at odds with the majority of his adoptive Whig party, which was pro-bank, proprotective tariff, and prointernal improvements.
Tyler too rhymed with Tippecanoe, but there the harmony ended.
As events turned out, President Harrison, the Whig, served for only 4 weeks, whereas Tyler, the exDemocrat who was still largely a Democrat at heart, served for 204 weeks.
After their hard-won, hard-cider victory, the Whigs brought their not-so-secret platform out of Clays waistcoat pocket.
To the surprise of no one, it outlined a strongly nationalistic program.
Financial reform came first.
The Whig Congress hastened to pass a law ending the independent treasury system, and President Tyler, disarmingly agreeable, signed it.
Clay next drove through Congress a bill for a Fiscal Bank, which would establish a new Bank of the United States.
Tylers hostility to a centralized bank was notorious, and Claythe Great Compromiserwould have done well to conciliate him.
But the Kentuckian, robbed repeatedly of the presidency by lesser men, was in an imperious mood and riding for a fall.
When the bank bill reached the presidential desk, Tyler flatly vetoed it on both practical and constitutional grounds.
A drunken mob gathered late at night near the White House and shouted insultingly, Huzza for Clay!
A Bank!
A Bank!
Down with the Veto!
The stunned Whig leaders tried once again.
Striving to pacify Tylers objections to a Fiscal Bank, they passed another bill providing for a Fiscal Corporation.
But the president, still unbending, vetoed the offensive substitute.
The Democrats were jubilant: they had been saved from another financial monster only by the pneumonia that had felled Harrison.
C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 Whig extremists, seething with indignation, condemned Tyler as His Accidency and as an Executive Ass.
Widely burned in effigy, he received numerous letters threatening him with death.
A wave of influenza then sweeping the country was called the Tyler grippe.
To the delight of Democrats, the stiff-necked Virginian was formally expelled from his party by a caucus of Whig congressmen, and a serious attempt to impeach him was broached in the House of Representatives.
His entire cabinet resigned in a body, except Secretary of State Webster, who  was then in the midst of delicate negotiations with England.
The proposed Whig tariff also felt the prick of the presidents well-inked pen.
Tyler appreciated the necessity of bringing additional revenue to the Treasury.
But old Democrat that he was, he looked with a frosty eye on the major tariff scheme of the Whigs because it provided, among other features, for a distribution among the states of revenue from the sale of public lands in the West.
Tyler could see no point in squandering federal money when the federal Treasury was not overflowing, and he again wielded an emphatic veto.
Chastened Clayites redrafted their tariff bill.
They chopped out the offensive dollar-distribution scheme and pushed down the rates to about the moderately protective level of 1832, roughly 32 percent on dutiable goods.
Tyler had no fondness for a protective tariff, but realizing the need for additional revenue, he reluctantly signed the law of 1842.
In subsequent months the pressure for higher customs duties slackened as the country gradually edged its way out of the depression.
The Whig slogan, Harrison, Two Dollars a Day and Roast Beef, was reduced by unhappy Democrats to, Ten Cents a Day and Bean Soup.
Hatred of Britain during the nineteenth century came to a head periodically and had to be lanced by treaty settlement or by war.
The poison had festered ominously by 1842.
Anti-British passions were composed of many ingredients.
At bottom lay the bitter, red-coated memories of the two Anglo-American wars.
In addition, the genteel pro-British Federalists had died  out, eventually yielding to the boisterous Jacksonian Democrats.
British travelers, sniffing with aristocratic noses at the crude scene, wrote acidly  of American tobacco spitting, slave auctioneering, lynching, eye gouging, and other unsavory features of the rustic Republic.
Travel books penned by these critics, whose views were avidly read on both sides of the Atlantic, stirred up angry outbursts in America.
But the literary fireworks did not end here.
British magazines added fuel to the flames when, enlarging on the travel books, they launched sneering attacks on Yankee shortcomings.
American journals struck back with youre another arguments, thus touching off the Third War with England.
Fortunately, this British-American war was fought with paper broadsides, and only ink was spilled.
British authors, including Charles Dickens, entered the fray with gall-dipped pens, for they were being denied rich royalties by the absence of an American copyright law.
* Sprawling America, with expensive canals to dig and railroads to build, was a borrowing nation in  the nineteenth century.
Imperial Britain, with its overflowing coffers, was a lending nation.
The wellheeled creditor is never popular with the down-atthe-heels debtor, and the phrase bloated British bond-holder rolled bitterly from many an American tongue.
When the panic of 1837 broke and several states defaulted on their bonds or repudiated them openly, honest Englishmen assailed Yankee trickery.
One of them offered a new stanza for an old song: Troubles of a more dangerous sort came closer to home in 1837, when a short-lived insurrection erupted in Canada.
It was supported by such a small minority of Canadians that it never had a real chance of success.
Yet hundreds of hot-blooded Americans, hoping to strike a blow for freedom against the hereditary enemy, furnished military supplies or volunteered for armed service.
The Washington regime tried arduously, though futilely, to uphold its weak neutrality regulations.
But again, as in the case of Texas, it simply could not enforce unpopular laws in the face of popular opposition.
A provocative incident on the Canadian frontier brought passions to a boil in 1837.
An American steamer, the  insurgents across the swift Niagara River.
It was finally attacked on the New York shore by a determined British force, which set the vessel on fire.
Lurid American illustrators showed the flaming ship, laden with shrieking souls, plummeting over Niagara Falls.
The craft in fact sank short of the plunge, and only one American was killed.
This unlawful invasion of American soila counterviolation of neutralityhad alarming aftermaths.
Washington officials lodged vigorous but ineffective protests.
Three years later, in 1840, the incident was dramatically revived in the state of New York.
A Canadian named McLeod, after allegedly boasting in a tavern of his part in the  London Foreign Office, which regarded the  raiders as members of a sanctioned armed force and not as criminals, made clear that his execution would mean war.
Fortunately, McLeod was freed after establishing an alibi.
It must have been airtight, for it was good enough to convince a New York jury.
The tension forthwith eased, but it snapped taut again in 1841, when British officials in the Bahamas offered asylum to 130 Virginia slaves who had rebelled and captured the American ship  An explosive controversy of the early 1840s involved the Maine boundary dispute.
The St.
Lawrence River is icebound several months of the year, as the British, remembering the War of 1812, well knew.
They were determined, as a defensive precaution against the Yankees, to build a road westward from the seaport of Halifax to Quebec.
But the proposed route ran through disputed territoryclaimed also by Maine under the misleading peace treaty of 1783.
Tough-knuckled lumberjacks from both Maine and Canada entered the disputed no-mans-land of the tall-timbered Aroostook River valley.
Ugly fights flared up, and both sides summoned the local militia.
The small-scale lumberjack clash, which was dubbed the Aroostook War, threatened to widen into a full-dress shooting war.
As the crisis deepened in 1842, the London Foreign Office took an unusual step.
It sent to Washington a nonprofessional diplomat, the conciliatory *Not until 1891 did Congress extend copyright privileges to foreign authors.
financier Lord Ashburton, who had married a wealthy American woman.
He speedily established cordial relations with Secretary Webster, who had recently been lionized during a visit to Britain.
The two statesmen, their nerves frayed by protracted negotiations in the heat of a Washington summer, finally agreed to compromise on the Maine boundary.
On the basis of a rough, split-thedifference arrangement, the Americans were to retain some 7,000 square miles of the 12,000 square miles of wilderness in dispute.
The British got less land but won the desired Halifax-Quebec route.
During the negotiations the  gering since 1837, was patched up by an exchange of diplomatic notes.
An overlooked bonus sneaked by in the small print of the same treaty: the British, in adjusting the U.S.-Canadian boundary farther west, surrendered 6,500 square miles.
The area was later found to contain the priceless Mesabi iron ore of Minnesota.
During the uncertain eight years since 1836, Texas had led a precarious existence.
Mexico, refusing  to recognize Texass independence, regarded the Lone Star Republic as a province in revolt, to be reconquered in the future.
Mexican officials loudly threatened war if the American eagle should ever gather the fledgling republic under its protective wings.
The Texans were forced to maintain a costly military establishment.
Vastly outnumbered by their Mexican foe, they could not tell when he would strike again.
Mexico actually did make two halfhearted raids that, though ineffectual, foreshadowed more fearsome efforts.
Confronted with such perils, Texas was driven to open negotiations with Britain and France, in the hope of securing the defensive shield of a protectorate.
In 1839 and 1840, the Texans concluded treaties with France, Holland, and Belgium.
Britain was intensely interested in an independent Texas.
Such a republic would check the southward surge of the American colossus, whose bulging biceps posed a constant threat to nearby British possessions in the New World.
A puppet Texas, dancing to strings pulled by Britain, could be turned upon the Yankees.
Subsequent clashes would create a smoke-screen diversion, behind which foreign powers could move into the Americas and challenge the insolent Monroe Doctrine.
French schemers were likewise attracted by the hoary game of divide and conquer.
These actions would result, they hoped, in the fragmentation and militarization of America.
Dangers threatened from other foreign quarters.
British abolitionists were busily intriguing for a foothold in Texas.
If successful in freeing the few blacks there, they presumably would inflame the nearby slaves of the South.
In addition, British merchants regarded Texas as a potentially important freetrade areaan offset to the tariff-walled United C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 (Acquired by  United States) (Given up by United States) Quebec Montreal Halifax NOVA SCOTIA N.H.
MAINE NEW BRUNSWICK QUEBEC Proposed road route Webster-Ashburton treaty line Maine Boundary Settlement, 1842 See the feeling with which the treaty has been received in America; mark the enthusiasm it has excited.
What does this mean?
Why, either that the Americans have gained a great diplomatic victory over us, or that they have escaped a great danger, as they have felt it, in having to maintain their claim by war.
States.
British manufacturers likewise perceived that those vast Texas plains constituted one of the great cotton-producing areas of the future.
An independent Texas would relieve British looms of their chronic dependence on American fibera supply that might be cut off in time of crisis by embargo or war.
Partly because of the fears aroused by British schemers, Texas became a leading issue in the presidential campaign of 1844.
The foes of expansion assailed annexation, while southern hotheads cried, Texas or Disunion.
The proexpansion Democrats under James K. Polk finally triumphed over the Whigs under Henry Clay, the hardy perennial candidate.
Lame duck president Tyler thereupon interpreted the narrow Democratic victory, with dubious accuracy, as a mandate to acquire Texas.
Eager to crown his troubled administration with this splendid prize, Tyler deserves much of the credit for shepherding Texas into the fold.
Many conscience Whigs feared that Texas in the Union would be red meat to nourish the lusty slave power.
Aware of their opposition, Tyler despaired of securing the needed two-thirds vote for a treaty in the Senate.
He therefore arranged for annexation by a joint resolution.
This solution required only a simple majority in both houses of Congress.
After a spirited debate, the resolution passed early in 1845, and Texas was formally invited to become the twentyeighth star on the American flag.
Mexico angrily charged that the Americans had despoiled it of Texas.
This was to some extent true in 1836, but hardly true in 1845, for the area was no longer Mexicos to be despoiled of.
As the years stretched out, realistic observers could see that the Mexicans would not be able to reconquer their lost province.
Yet Mexico left the Texans dangling by denying their right to dispose of themselves as they chose.
By 1845 the Lone Star Republic had become a danger spot, inviting foreign intrigue that menaced the American people.
The continued existence of Texas as an independent nation threatened to involve the United States in a series of ruinous wars, both in America and in Europe.
Americans were in a lick all creation mood when they sang Uncle Sams Song to Miss Texas: What other power would have spurned the imperial domain of Texas?
The bride was so near,  so rich, so fair, so willing.
Whatever the peculiar  circumstances of the Texas revolution, the United States can hardly be accused of unseemly haste in achieving annexation.
Nine long years were surely a decent wait between the beginning of the courtship and the consummation of the marriage.
The so-called Oregon Country was an enormous wilderness.
It sprawled magnificently west of the Rockies to the Pacific Ocean, and north of California to the line of 54 40'the present southern tip of the Alaska panhandle.
All or substantial parts of this immense area were claimed at one time or another by four nations: Spain, Russia, Britain, and the United States.
Two claimants dropped out of the scramble.
Spain, though the first to raise its banner in Oregon, bartered away its claims to the United States in the so-called Florida Treaty of 1819.
Russia retreated to the line of 54 40' by the treaties of 1824 and 1825 with America and Britain.
These two remaining rivals now had the field to themselves.
British claims to Oregon were strongat least to that portion north of the Columbia River.
They were based squarely on prior discovery and exploOur people are spreading out with the aid of the American multiplication table.
Go to the West and see a young man with his mate of eighteen; after the lapse of thirty years, visit him again, and instead of two, you will find twenty-two.
That is what I call the American multiplication table.
ration, on treaty rights, and on actual occupation.
The most important colonizing agency was the farflung Hudsons Bay Company, which was trading profitably with the Indians of the Pacific Northwest for furs.
Americans, for their part, could also point pridefully to exploration and occupation.
Captain Robert Gray in 1792 had stumbled upon the majestic Columbia River, which he named after his ship; and the famed Lewis and Clark expedition of  18041806 had ranged overland through the Oregon Country to the Pacific.
This shaky American toehold was ultimately strengthened by the presence of missionaries and other settlers, a sprinkling of whom reached the grassy Willamette River valley, south of the Columbia, in the 1830s.
These men and women of God, in saving the soul of the Indian, were instrumental in saving the soil of Oregon for the United States.
They stimulated interest in a faraway domain that countless Americans had earlier assumed would not be settled for centuries.
Scattered American and British pioneers in Oregon continued to live peacefully side by side.
At the time of negotiating the Treaty of 1818 (see p.
251), the United States had sought to divide the vast domain at the forty-ninth parallel.
But the British, who regarded the Columbia River as the St.
Lawrence of the West, were unwilling to yield this vital artery.
A scheme for peaceful joint occupation was thereupon adopted, pending future settlement.
The handful of Americans in the Willamette Valley was suddenly multiplied in the early 1840s, when Oregon fever seized hundreds of restless pioneers.
In increasing numbers, their creaking covered wagons jolted over the two-thousand-mile Oregon Trail as the human rivulet widened into a stream.
* By 1846 about five thousand Americans had settled south of the Columbia River, some of them tough border ruffians, expert with bowie knife and revolving pistol.
The British, in the face of this rising torrent of humanity, could muster only seven hundred or so C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 *The average rate of progress in covered wagons was one to two miles an hour.
This amounted to about one hundred miles a week, or about five months for the entire journey.
Thousands of humans, in addition to horses and oxen, died en route.
One estimate is seventeen deaths a mile for men, women, and  children.
subjects north of the Columbia.
Losing out lopsidedly in the population race, they were beginning to see the wisdom of arriving at a peaceful settlement before being engulfed by their neighbors.
A curious fact is that only a relatively small segment of the Oregon Country was in actual controversy by 1845.
The area in dispute consisted of the rough quadrangle between the Columbia River on the south and east, the forty-ninth parallel on the north, and the Pacific Ocean on the west.
Britain had repeatedly offered the line of the Columbia; America had repeatedly offered the forty-ninth parallel.
The whole fateful issue was now tossed into the presidential election of 1844, where it was largely overshadowed by the question of annexing Texas.
The two major parties nominated their presidential standard-bearers in May 1844.
Ambitious but often frustrated Henry Clay, easily the most popular man in the country, was enthusiastically chosen by the Whigs at Baltimore.
The Democrats, meeting there later, seemed hopelessly deadlocked.
Finally the expansionists, dominated by the pro-Texas southerners, trotted out and nominated James K. Polk of Tennessee, Americas first dark-horse or surprise presidential candidate.
Polk may have been a dark horse, but he was hardly an unknown or decrepit nag.
Speaker of the House of Representatives for four years and governor of Tennessee for two terms, he was a determined, industrious, ruthless, and intelligent public servant.
Sponsored by Andrew Jackson, his friend and neighbor, he was rather implausibly touted by Democrats as yet another Young Hickory.
Whigs attempted to jeer him into oblivion with the taunt, Who is James K. Polk?
They soon found out.
The campaign of 1844 was in part an expression of the mighty emotional upsurge known as Manifest Destiny.
Countless citizens in the 1840s and 1850s, feeling a sense of mission, believed that Almighty God had manifestly destined the American people for a hemispheric career.
They would irresistibly spread their uplifting and ennobling democratic institutions over at least the entire continent, and possibly over South America as well.
Land greed and idealsempire and libertywere thus conveniently conjoined.
Expansionist Democrats were strongly swayed by the intoxicating spell of Manifest Destiny.
They came out flat-footedly in their platform for the Reannexation of Texas* and the Reoccupation of Oregon, all the way to 54 40'.
Outbellowing the Whig log-cabinites in the game of slogans, they shouted All of Oregon or None.
They also condemned Clay as a corrupt bargainer, a dissolute character, and a slaveowner.
(Their own candidate, Polk, also owned slavesa classic case of the pot calling the kettle black.
) *The United States had given up its claims to Texas in the socalled Florida Purchase Treaty with Spain in 1819 (see p.
252).
The slogan Fifty-four forty or fight was evidently not coined until two years later, in 1846.
The Whigs, as noisemakers, took no back seat.
They countered with such slogans as Hooray for Clay and Polk, Slavery, and Texas, or Clay, Union, and Liberty.
They also spread the lie that a gang of Tennessee slaves had been seen on their way to a southern market branded with the initials J. K. P.
(James K. Polk).
On the crucial issue of Texas, the acrobatic Clay tried to ride two horses at once.
The Great Compromiser appears to have compromised away the presidency when he wrote a series of confusing letters.
They seemed to say that while he personally favored annexing slaveholding Texas (an appeal to the South), he also favored postponement (an appeal to the North).
He might have lost more ground if he had not straddled, but he certainly alienated the more ardent antislaveryites.
In the stretch drive, Dark Horse Polk nipped Henry Clay at the wire, 170 to 105 votes in the Electoral College and 1,338,464 to 1,300,097 in the popular column.
Clay would have won if he had not lost New York State by a scant 5,000 votes.
There the tiny antislavery Liberty party absorbed nearly 16,000 votes, many of which would otherwise have gone to the unlucky Kentuckian.
Ironically, the anti-Texas Liberty party, by spoiling Clays chances and helping to ensure the election of pro-Texas Polk, hastened the annexation of Texas.
Land-hungry Democrats, flushed with victory, proclaimed that they had received a mandate from the voters to take Texas.
But a presidential election is seldom, if ever, a clear-cut mandate on anything.
The only way to secure a true reflection of the voters will is to hold a special election on a given issue.
The picture that emerged in 1844 is one not of mandate but of muddle.
What else could there have been when the results were so close, the personalities so colorful, and the issues so numerousincluding Oregon, Texas, the tariff, slavery, the bank, and internal improvements?
Yet this unclear mandate was interpreted by President Tyler as a crystal-clear charge to annex Texasand he signed the joint resolution three days before leaving the White House.
Young Hickory Polk, unlike Old Hickory Jackson, was not an impressive figure.
Of middle height (five feet eight inches), lean, white-haired (worn long), gray-eyed, and stern-faced, he took life seriously and drove himself mercilessly into a premature grave.
His burdens were increased by an unwillingness to delegate authority.
Methodical and hard-working but not brilliant, he was shrewd,  C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 narrow-minded, conscientious, and persistent.
What he went for he fetched, wrote a contemporary.
Purposeful in the highest degree, he developed a positive four-point program and with remarkable success achieved it completely in less than four years.
One of Polks goals was a lowered tariff.
His secretary of the Treasury, wispy Robert J. Walker, devised a tariff-for-revenue bill that reduced the average rates of the Tariff of 1842 from about 32 percent to 25 percent.
With the strong support of lowtariff southerners, Walker lobbied the measure through Congress, though not without loud complaints from the Clayites, especially in New England and the middle states, that American manufacturing would be ruined.
But these prophets of doom missed the mark.
The Walker Tariff of 1846 proved to be an excellent revenue producer, largely because it was followed by boom times and heavy imports.
A second objective of Polk was the restoration  of the independent treasury, unceremoniously dropped by the Whigs in 1841.
Pro-bank Whigs in Congress raised a storm of opposition, but victory at last rewarded the presidents efforts in 1846.
The third and fourth points on Polks must list were the acquisition of California and the settlement of the Oregon dispute.
Reoccupation of the whole of Oregon had been promised northern Democrats in the campaign of 1844.
But southern Democrats, once they had annexed Texas, rapidly cooled off.
Polk, himself a southerner, had no intention of insisting on the 54 40' pledge of his own platform.
But feeling bound by the three offers of his predecessors to London, he again proposed the compromise line of 49.
The British minister in Washington, on his own initiative, brusquely spurned this olive branch.
The next move on the Oregon chessboard was up to Britain.
Fortunately for peace, the ministry began to experience a change of heart.
British antiexpansionists (Little Englanders) were now persuaded that the Columbia River was not after all the St.
Lawrence of the West and that the turbulent American hordes might one day seize the Oregon Country.
Why fight a hazardous war over this wilderness on behalf of an unpopular monopoly, the Hudsons Bay Company, which had already furred out much of the area anyhow?
Early in 1846 the British, hat in hand, came around and themselves proposed the line of 49.
President Polk, irked by the previous rebuff, threw the decision squarely into the lap of the Senate.
The senators speedily accepted the offer and approved the subsequent treaty, despite a few diehard shouts of Fifty-four forty forever!
and Every foot or not an inch!
The fact that the United States was then a month deep in a war with Mexico doubtless influenced the Senates final vote.
Satisfaction with the Oregon settlement among Americans was not unanimous.
The northwestern states, hotbed of Manifest Destiny and fifty-four fortyism, joined the antislavery forces in condemning what they regarded as a base betrayal by the South.
Why  Because, retorted the expansionist Senator Benton of Missouri, Great Britain is powerful and Mexico is weak.
So Polk, despite all the campaign bluster,  got neither fifty-four forty nor a fight.
But he did get something that in the long run was better: a reasonable compromise without a rifle being raised.
Faraway California was another worry of Polks.
He and other disciples of Manifest Destiny had long coveted its verdant valleys, and especially the spacious bay of San Francisco.
This splendid harbor was widely regarded as Americas future gateway to the Pacific Ocean.
The population of California in 1845 was curiously mixed.
It consisted of perhaps thirteen thousand sun-blessed Spanish-Mexicans and as many as seventy-five thousand dispirited Indians.
There were fewer than a thousand foreigners, mostly Americans, some of whom had left their consciences behind them as they rounded Cape Horn.
Given time, these transplanted Yankees might yet bring California into the Union by playing the Texas game.
Polk was eager to buy California from Mexico, but relations with Mexico City were dangerously embittered.
Among other friction points, the United States had claims against the Mexicans for some $3 million in damages to American citizens and their property.
The revolution-riddled regime in Mexico had formally agreed to assume most of this debt but had been forced to default on its payments.
A more serious bone of contention was Texas.
The Mexican government, after threatening war if the United States should acquire the Lone Star Republic, had recalled its minister from Washington C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 New England 9 19 Middle states 18 44 West and Northwest 29 10 South and Southwest 58 20 TOTAL 114 93    M E X I C O U N I T E D  STATES B R I T I S H N O R T H   A M E R I C A ( C A N A D A ) OREGON COUNTRY Ft.
Vancouver British treaty line, 1818 Focus of dispute by 1846 Area of original dispute over Oregon Ore gon T rail Compromise line, 1846 The Oregon Controversy, 1846 following annexation.
Diplomatic relations were completely severed.
Deadlock with Mexico over Texas was further tightened by a question of boundaries.
During the long era of Spanish-Mexican occupation, the southwestern boundary of Texas had been the Nueces River.
But the expansive Texans, on rather farfetched grounds, were claiming the more southerly Rio Grande instead.
Polk, for his part, felt a strong moral obligation to defend Texas in its claim, once it was annexed.
The Mexicans were far less concerned about this boundary quibble than was the United States.
In their eyes all of Texas was still theirs, although temporarily in revolt, and a dispute over the two rivers seemed pointless.
Yet Polk was careful to keep American troops out of virtually all of the explosive no-mans-land between the Nueces and the Rio Grande, as long as there was any real prospect of peaceful adjustment.
The golden prize of California continued to cause Polk much anxiety.
Disquieting rumors (now known to have been ill-founded) were circulating that Britain was about to buy or seize California a grab that Americans could not tolerate under the Monroe Doctrine.
In a last desperate throw of the dice, Polk dispatched John Slidell to Mexico City as minister late in 1845.
The new envoy, among other alternatives, was instructed to offer a maximum of $25 million for California and territory to the east.
But the proud Mexican people would not even permit Slidell to present his insulting proposition.
A frustrated Polk was now prepared to force a showdown.
On January 13, 1846, he ordered four thousand men, under General Zachary Taylor, to march from the Nueces River to the Rio Grande, provocatively near Mexican forces.
Polks presidential diary reveals that he expected at any moment to hear of a clash.
When none occurred after an anxious wait, he informed his cabinet on May 9, 1846, that he proposed to ask Congress to declare war on the basis of (1) unpaid claims and (2) Slidells rejection.
These, at best, were rather flimsy pretexts.
Two cabinet members spoke up and said that they would feel better satisfied if Mexican troops should fire first.
That very evening, as fate would have it, news  of bloodshed arrived.
On April 25, 1846, Mexican troops had crossed the Rio Grande and attacked General Taylors command, with a loss of sixteen Americans killed or wounded.
Polk, further aroused, sent a vigorous war message to Congress.
He declared that despite all our efforts to avoid a clash, hostilities had been forced The act of sending an armed force among the Mexicans was unnecessary, inasmuch as Mexico was in no way molesting or menacing the United States or the people thereof; and .
it was unconstitutional, because the power of levying war is vested in Congress, and not in the President.
upon the country by the shedding of American blood upon the American soil.
A patriotic Congress overwhelmingly voted for war, and enthusiastic volunteers cried, Ho for the Halls of the Montezumas!
and Mexico or Death!
Inflamed by the war fever, even antislavery Whig bastions melted and joined with the rest of the nation, though they later condemned Jimmy Polks war.
As James Russell Lowell of Massachusetts lamented, In his message to Congress, Polk was making historynot writing it.
If he had been a historian, he would have explained that American blood had been shed on soil that the Mexicans had good  reason to regard as their own.
A gangling, roughfeatured Whig congressman from Illinois, one Abraham Lincoln, introduced certain resolutions that requested information as to the precise spot on American soil where American blood had been shed.
He pushed his spot resolutions with such persistence that he came to be known as the spotty Lincoln, who could die of spotted fever.
The more C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 Major Campaigns of the Mexican War extreme antislavery agitators of the North, many of them Whigs, branded the president a liarPolk the Mendacious.
Did Polk provoke war?
California was an imperative point in his program, and Mexico would not sell it at any price.
The only way to get it was to use force or wait for an internal American revolt.
Yet delay seemed dangerous, for the claws of the British lion might snatch the ripening California fruit from the talons of the American eagle.
Grievances against Mexico were annoying yet tolerable; in later years America endured even worse ones.
But in 1846 patience had ceased to be a virtue, as far as Polk  was concerned.
Bent on grasping California by fair means or foul, he pushed the quarrel to a bloody showdown.
Both sides, in fact, were spoiling for a fight.
Feisty Americans, especially southwestern expansionists, were eager to teach the Mexicans a lesson.
The Mexicans, in turn, were burning to humiliate the Bullies of the North.
Possessing a considerable standing army, heavily overstaffed with generals, they boasted of invading the United States, freeing the black slaves, and lassoing whole regiments of Americans.
They were hoping that the quarrel with Britain over Oregon would blossom into a full-dress war, as it came near doing, and further pin down the hated  expanses seemed fantastic, especially in view of the bungling American invasion of Canada in 1812.
Both sides were fired by moral indignation.
The Mexican people could fight with the flaming sword of righteousness, for had not the insolent Yankee picked a fight by polluting their soil?
Many earnest Americans, on the other hand, sincerely believed that Mexico was the aggressor.
Polk wanted Californianot war.
But when war came, he hoped to fight it on a limited scale and then pull out when he had captured the prize.
The dethroned Mexican dictator Santa Anna, then exiled with his teenage bride in Cuba, let it be known that if the American blockading squadron would permit him to slip into Mexico, he would sell out his country.
Incredibly, Polk agreed to this discreditable intrigue.
But the double-crossing Santa Anna, once he returned to Mexico, proceeded to rally his countrymen to a desperate defense of their soil.
American operations in the Southwest and in California were completely successful.
In 1846 General Stephen W. Kearny led a detachment of seventeen hundred troops over the famous Santa Fe Trail from Fort Leavenworth to Santa Fe.
This sunbaked outpost, with its drowsy plazas, was easily captured.
But before Kearny could reach California, the fertile province was won.
When war broke out, Captain John C. Frmont, the dashing explorer, just happened to be there with several dozen well-armed men.
In helping to overthrow Mexican rule in 1846, he collaborated with American naval officers and with the local Americans, who had hoisted the banner of the short-lived California Bear Flag Republic.
General Zachary Taylor meanwhile had been spearheading the main thrust.
Known as Old Rough and Ready because of his iron constitution and incredibly unsoldierly appearancehe sometimes wore a Mexican straw hathe fought his way across the Rio Grande into Mexico.
After several gratifying victories, he reached Buena Vista.
There, on February 2223, 1847, his weakened force of  five thousand men was attacked by some twenty thousand march-weary troops under Santa Anna.
The Mexicans were finally repulsed with extreme difficulty, and overnight Zachary Taylor became the Hero of Buena Vista.
One Kentuckian was heard to say that Old Zack would be elected president in 1848 by spontaneous combustion.
Sound American strategy now called for a crushing blow at the enemys vitalsMexico City.
General Taylor, though a good leader of modestsized forces, could not win decisively in the semideserts of northern Mexico.
The command of the main expedition, which pushed inland from the coastal city of Vera Cruz early in 1847, was entrusted to General Winfield Scott.
A handsome giant of a man, Scott had emerged as a hero from the War of 1812 and had later earned the nickname Old Fuss and Feathers because of his resplendent uniforms and strict discipline.
He was severely handicapped in the Mexican campaign by inadequate numbers of troops, by expiring enlistments, by a more numerous enemy, by mountainous terrain, by disease, and by political backbiting at home.
Yet he succeeded in battling his way up to Mexico City by September 1847 in one of the most brilliant campaigns in American military annals.
He proved to be the most distinguished general produced by his country between 1783 and 1861.
Polk was anxious to end the shooting as soon as he could secure his territorial goals.
Accordingly, he sent along with Scotts invading army the chief clerk of the State Department, Nicholas P. Trist, who among other weaknesses was afflicted with an overfluid pen.
Trist and Scott arranged for an armistice with Santa Anna, at a cost of $10,000.
The wily dictator pocketed the bribe and then used the time to bolster his defenses.
Negotiating a treaty with a sword in one hand and a pen in the other was ticklish business.
Polk, disgusted with his blundering envoy, abruptly recalled Trist.
The wordy diplomat then dashed off a sixty-five-page letter explaining why he was not coming home.
The president was furious.
But Trist, grasping a fleeting opportunity to negotiate, signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo on February 2, 1848, and forwarded it to Washington.
The terms of the treaty were breathtaking.
They confirmed the American title to Texas and yielded the enormous area stretching westward to Oregon and the ocean and embracing coveted California.
This total expanse, including Texas, was about onehalf of Mexico.
The United States agreed to  pay $15 million for the land and to assume the claims of its citizens against Mexico in the amount of $3,250,000 (see Makers of America: The Californios, pp.
386387).
Polk submitted the treaty to the Senate.
Although Trist had proved highly annoying, he had generally followed his original instructions.
And speed was C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 imperative.
The antislavery Whigs in Congress dubbed Mexican Whigs or Conscience Whigs were denouncing this damnable war with increasing heat.
Having secured control of the House in 1847, they were even threatening to vote down supplies for the armies in the field.
If they had done so, Scott probably would have been forced to retreat, and the fruits of victory might have been tossed away.
Another peril impended.
A swelling group of expansionists, intoxicated by Manifest Destiny, was clamoring for all of Mexico.
If America had seized it, the nation would have been saddled with an expensive and vexatious policing problem.
Farseeing southerners like Calhoun, alarmed by the mounting anger of antislavery agitators, realized that the South would do well not to be too greedy.
The treaty was finally approved by the Senate, 38 to 14.
Oddly enough, it was condemned both by those opponents who wanted all of Mexico and by opponents who wanted none of it.
Victors rarely pay an indemnity, especially after a costly conflict has been forced on them.
Yet Polk, who had planned to offer $25 million before fighting the war, arranged to pay $18,250,000 after winning it.
Cynics have charged that the Americans were pricked by guilty consciences; apologists have pointed proudly to the Anglo-Saxon spirit of fair play.
A decisive factor was the need for haste, while there was still a responsible Mexican government to carry out the treaty and before political foes in the United States, notably the antislavery zealots, sabotaged Polks expansionist program.
As wars go, the Mexican War was a small one.
It cost some thirteen thousand American lives, most of them taken by disease.
But the fruits of the fighting were enormous.
Americas total expanse, already vast, was increased by about one-third (counting Texas)an addition even greater than that of the Louisiana Purchase.
A sharp stimulus was given to the spirit  of Manifest Destiny, for as the proverb has it, the appetite comes with eating.
As fate ordained, the Mexican War was the blood-spattered schoolroom of the Civil War.
The campaigns provided priceless field experience for most of the officers destined to become leading generals in the forthcoming conflict, including Captain Robert E. Lee and Lieutenant Ulysses S. Grant.
The Military Academy at West Point, founded in 1802, fully justified its existence through the welltrained officers.
Useful also was the navy, which did valuable work in throwing a crippling blockade around Mexican ports.
The Marine Corps, in existence since 1798, won new laurels and to this day sings in its stirring hymn about the Halls of  Montezuma.
The army waged war without defeat and without a major blunder, despite formidable obstacles and a half-dozen or so achingly long marches.
Chagrined British critics, as well as other foreign skeptics, reluctantly revised upward their estimate of Yankee military prowess.
Opposing armies, moreover, emerged with increased respect for each other.
The Mexicans, though poorly led, fought heroically.
At Chapultepec, near Mexico City, the teenage lads of the military academy there  Long-memoried Mexicans have never forgotten that their northern enemy tore away about half of their country.
The argument that they were lucky not to lose all of it, and that they had been paid something for their land, has scarcely lessened their bitterness.
The war also marked an ugly turning point in the relations between the United States  and Latin America as a whole.
Hitherto, Uncle Sam had been regarded with some complacency, even friendliness.
Henceforth, he was increasingly feared as the Colossus of the North.
Suspicious neighbors to the south condemned him as a greedy and untrustworthy bully, who might next despoil them of their soil.
Now we ask, whether any man can coolly contemplate the idea of recalling our troops from the [Mexican] territory we at present occupy .
and .
resign this beautiful country to the custody of the ignorant cowards and profligate ruffians who have ruled it for the last twenty-five years?
Why, humanity cries out against it.
Civilization and Christianity protest against this reflux of the tide of barbarism and anarchy.
n 1848 the United States, swollen with the spoils of war, reckoned the costs and benefits of the conflict with Mexico.
Thousands of Americans had fallen in battle, and millions of dollars had been invested in a war machine.
For this expenditure of blood and money, the nation was repaid with ample land and with people, the former citizens of Mexico who now became, whether willingly or not, Americans.
The largest single addition to American territory in history, the Mexican Cession stretched the United States from sea to shining sea.
It secured Texas, brought in vast tracts of the desert Southwest, and included the great prizethe fruited valleys and port cities of California.
There, at the conclusion of the Mexican War, dwelled some thirteen thousand Californiosdescendants of the Spanish and Mexican conquerors who had once ruled California.
The Spanish had first arrived in California in 1769, extending their New World empire and outracing Russian traders to bountiful San Francisco Bay.
Father Junipero Serra, an enterprising Franciscan friar, soon established twenty-one missions along the coast.
Indians in the iron grip of the missions were encouraged to adopt Christianity and were often forced to toil endlessly as farmers and herders, in the process suffering disease and degradation.
These frequently maltreated mission Indians occupied the lowest rungs on the ladder of Spanish colonial society.
Upon the loftiest rungs perched the Californios.
Pioneers from the Mexican heartland of New Spain, they had trailed Serra to California, claiming land and civil offices in their new home.
Yet even the proud Californios had deferred to the all-powerful Franciscan missionaries until Mexico threw off the Spanish colonial yoke in 1821, whereupon the infant Mexican government turned an anxious eye toward its frontier outpost.
Mexico now emptied its jails to send settlers to the sparsely populated north, built and garrisoned fortresses, and, most important, transferred authority from the missions to secular (that is, governmental) authorities.
This secularization program attacked and eroded the immense power of the  missions and of their Franciscan masterswith their bawling herds of cattle, debased Indian workers, millions of acres of land, and lucrative foreign trade.
The frocked friars had commanded their fiefdoms so self-confidently that earlier reform efforts had dared to go no further than levying a paltry tax on the missions and politely requesting that the missionaries limit their floggings of Indians to fifteen lashes per week.
But during the 1830s, the power of the missions weakened, and much of their land and their assets were confiscated by the Californios.
Vast  those citadels the Californios ruled in their turn until the Mexican War.
The Californios glory faded in the wake of the American victory, even though in some isolated places they clung to their political offices for a decade or two.
Overwhelmed by the inrush of Anglo gold-diggerssome eighty-seven thousand after the discovery at Sutters Mill in 1848and undone by the waning of the pastoral economy, the Californios saw their recently acquired lands and their recently established political power slip through their fingers.
When the Civil War broke out in 1861, so harshly did the word  many Californios supported the South.
By 1870 the Californios brief ascendancy had utterly vanisheda short and sad tale of riches to rags in the face of the Anglo onslaught.
Half a century later, beginning in 1910, hundreds of thousands of young Mexicans would flock into California and the Southwest.
They would enter a region liberally endowed with Spanish architecture and artifacts, bearing the names of Spanish missions and Californio   dominated by Anglos, a place far different from that which their Californio ancestors had settled so hopefully in earlier days.
San Francisco Solano (1823) San Francisco Monterey San Francisco de Ass (1776) San Jos (1797) Santa Cruz (1791) San Juan Bautista (1797) Soledad (1791) San Miguel (1797) San Luis Obispo (1772) Santa Ynez (1804) San Buenaventura (1782) San Fernando Rey (1797) San Gabriel (1771) San Juan Capistrano (1776) San Luis Rey (1798) San Diego de Alcal (1769) Santa Barbara (1786) La Pursima Concepcin (1787) San Antonio de Padua (1771) San Carlos Borromeo (1770) Santa Clara (1777) San Rafael (1817) S I E R R A N E V A D A Missions Presidios (Forts) El Camino Ral (Royal Road) Spanish Missions and Presidios Most ominous of all, the war rearoused the snarling dog of the slavery issue, and the beast did not stop yelping until drowned in the blood of the Civil War.
Abolitionists assailed the Mexican conflict as one provoked by the southern slavocracy for its own evil purposes.
As James Russell Lowell had Hosea Biglow drawl in his Yankee dialect, In line with Lowells charge, the bulk of the American volunteers were admittedly from the South and Southwest.
But, as in the case of the Texas revolution, the basic explanation was proximity rather than conspiracy.
Quarreling over slavery extension also erupted on the floors of Congress.
In 1846, shortly after the shooting started, Polk had requested an appropriation of $2 million with which to buy a peace.
Representative David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, fearful of the southern slavocracy, introduced a fateful amendment.
It stipulated that slavery should never exist in any of the territory to be wrested from Mexico.
The disruptive Wilmot amendment twice passed the House, but not the Senate.
Southern members, unwilling to be robbed of prospective slave states, fought the restriction tooth and nail.
Antislavery men, in Congress and out, battled  no less bitterly for the exclusion of slaves.
The Wilmot Proviso, eventually endorsed by the legislatures of all but one of the free states, soon came  to symbolize the burning issue of slavery in the  territories.
In a broad sense, the opening shots of the Mexican War were the opening shots of the Civil War.
President Polk left the nation the splendid physical heritage of California and the Southwest but also the ugly moral heritage of an embittered slavery dispute.
Mexico will poison us, said the philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson.
Even the great champion  of the South, John C. Calhoun, had prophetically warned that Mexico is to us the forbidden fruit .
the penalty of eating it would be to subject our institutions to political death.
Mexicans could later take some satisfaction in knowing that the territory wrenched from them had proved to be a venomous apple of discord that could well be called Santa Annas revenge.
C HAPTER 17 Manifest Destiny and Its Legacy, 18411848 Canadian rebellion and  Harrison dies after four weeks in office Tyler assumes presidency Aroostook War over Maine boundary Webster-Ashburton treaty Polk defeats Clay in Manifest Destiny  election United States annexes Texas Walker Tariff Independent Treasury restored United States settles Oregon dispute with  Britain United States and Mexico clash over Texas boundary Kearny takes Santa Fe Frmont conquers California Wilmot Proviso passes House of  Representatives Mexican War Battle of Buena Vista Scott takes Mexico City Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo For further reading, see page A12 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Renewing the Sectional Struggle  18481854 D ANIEL W EBSTER , S EVENTH OF M ARCH SPEECH , 1850 T he year 1848, highlighted by a rash of revolutions in Europe, was filled with unrest in America.
The Treaty of Guadalupe Hildalgo had officially ended the war with Mexico, but it had initiated  a new and perilous round of political warfare in  the United States.
The vanquished Mexicans had been forced to relinquish an enormous tract of  real estate, including Texas, California, and all the area between.
The acquisition of this huge domain raised anew the burning issue of extending slavery into the territories.
Northern antislaveryites had rallied behind the Wilmot Proviso, which flatly prohibited slavery in any territory acquired in the Mexican War.
Southern senators had blocked the passage of the proviso, but the issue would not die.
Ominously, debate over slavery in the area of the Mexican Cession threatened to disrupt the ranks of both Whigs and Democrats and split national politics along North-South sectional lines.
Each of the two great political parties was a vital bond of national unity, for each enjoyed powerful support in both North and South.
If they should be replaced by two purely sectional groupings, the Union would be in peril.
To politicians, the wisest strategy seemed to be to sit on the lid of the slavery issue and ignore the boiling beneath.
Even so, the cover bobbed up and down ominously in response to the agitation of zealous northern abolitionists and impassioned southern fire-eaters.
Anxious Democrats were forced to seek a new standard-bearer in 1848.
President Polk, broken in health by overwork and chronic diarrhea, had pledged himself to a single term.
The Democratic National Convention at Baltimore turned to an aging leader, General Lewis Cass, a veteran of the War of 1812.
Although a senator and diplomat of wide experience and considerable ability, he was sour-visaged and somewhat pompous.
His enemies dubbed him General Gass and quickly noted that form, in line with the lid-sitting strategy, was silent on the burning issue of slavery in the territories.
But Cass himself had not been silent.
His views on the extension of slavery were well known because he was the reputed father of popular sovereignty.
This was the doctrine that stated that the sovereign people of a territory, under the general principles of the Constitution, should themselves determine the status of slavery.
Popular sovereignty had a persuasive appeal.
The public liked it because it accorded with the democratic tradition of self-determination.
Politicians liked it because it seemed a comfortable compromise between the abolitionist bid for a ban on slavery in the territories and southern demands that Congress protect slavery in the territories.
Popular sovereignty tossed the slavery problem into the laps of the people in the various territories.
Advocates of the principle thus hoped to dissolve the most stubborn national issue of the day into a series of local issues.
Yet popular sovereignty had one fatal defect: it might serve to spread the blight of slavery.
The Whigs, meeting in Philadelphia, cashed in on the Taylor fever.
They nominated frank and honest Zachary Taylor, the Hero of Buena Vista, who had never held civil office or even voted for president.
Henry Clay, the living embodiment of Whiggism, should logically have been nominated.
But Clay had made too many speechesand too many enemies.
As usual, the Whigs pussyfooted in their platform.
Eager to win at any cost, they dodged all troublesome issues and merely extolled the homespun virtues of their candidate.
The self-reliant old frontier fighter had not committed himself on the issue of slavery extension.
But as a wealthy resident of Louisiana, living on a sugar plantation, he owned scores of slaves.
Ardent antislavery men in the North, distrusting both Cass and Taylor, organized the Free Soil party.
Aroused by the conspiracy of silence in the Democratic and Whig platforms, the Free-Soilers made  no bones about their own stand.
They came out foursquare for the Wilmot Proviso and against slavery in the territories.
Going beyond other antislavery groups, they broadened their appeal by advocating federal aid for internal improvements and by urging free government homesteads for  settlers.
The new party assembled a strange assortment of new fellows in the same political bed.
It attracted industrialists miffed at Polks reduction of protective tariffs.
It appealed to Democrats resentful of Polks settling for part of Oregon while insisting on all  of Texasa disparity that suggested a menacing southern dominance in the Democratic party.
It harbored many northerners whose hatred was directed not so much at slavery as at blacks and  who gagged at the prospect of sharing the  newly acquired western territories with AfricanAmericans.
It also contained a large element of conscience Whigs, heavily influenced by the abolitionist crusade, who condemned slavery on moral grounds.
The Free-Soilers trotted out wizened former president Van Buren and marched into the fray, shouting, Free soil, free speech, free labor, and free men.
These freedoms provided the bedrock on which the Free-Soilers built their party.
Free-Soilers condemned slavery not so much for enslaving blacks but for destroying the chances of free white workers to rise up from wage-earning dependence to the esteemed status of self-employment.
FreeSoilers argued that only with free soil in the West could a traditional American commitment to upward mobility continue to flourish.
If forced to compete with slave labor, more costly wage labor would inevitably wither away, and with it the chance for the American worker to own property.
As the first widely inclusive party organized around the issue of slavery and confined to a single section,  the Free Soil party foreshadowed the emergence of the Republican party six years later.
With the slavery issue officially shoved under the rug by the two major parties, the politicians on both sides opened fire on personalities.
The amateurish Taylor had to be carefully watched, lest his indiscreet pen puncture the reputation won by his sword.
His admirers puffed him up as a gallant knight and a Napoleon, and sloganized his remark, allegedly uttered during the Battle of Buena Vista, General Taylor never surrenders.
Taylors wartime popularity pulled him through.
He harvested 1,360,967 popular and 163 electoral votes, as compared with Casss 1,222,342 popular and 127 electoral votes.
Free-Soiler Van Buren, although winning no state, polled 291,263 ballots and apparently diverted enough Democratic strength from Cass in the crucial state of New York to throw the election to Taylor.
Tobacco-chewing President Taylorwith his stumpy legs, rough features, heavy jaw, black hair, ruddy complexion, and squinty gray eyeswas a military square peg in a political round hole.
He would have been spared much turmoil if he could have continued to sit on the slavery lid.
But the discovery of gold in California, early in 1848, blew the cover off.
A horde of adventurers poured into the valleys of California.
Singing O Susannah!
and shouting Gold!
Gold!
Gold!
they began tearing frantically at the yellow-graveled streams and hills.
A fortunate few of the bearded miners struck it rich at the diggings.
But the luckless many, who netted blisters instead of nuggets, probably would have been money well ahead if they had stayed at home unaffected by the gold fever, which was often followed by more deadly fevers.
The most reliable profits were made by those who mined the miners, notably by charging outrageous rates for laundry and other personal services.
Some soiled clothing was even sent as far away as the Hawaiian Islands for  washing.
C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 California Gold Rush Country Miners from all over the world swarmed over the rivers that drained the western slope of Californias Sierra Nevada.
Their nationalities and religions, their languages and their ways of life, are recorded in the colorful place names they left behind.
The overnight inpouring of tens of thousands of people into the future Golden State completely overwhelmed the one-horse government of California.
A distressingly high proportion of the newcomers were lawless men, accompanied or followed by virtueless women.
A contemporary song ran, An outburst of crime inevitably resulted from the presence of so many miscreants and outcasts.
Robbery, claim jumping, and murder were commonplace, and such violence was only partly  discouraged by rough vigilante justice.
In San Francisco, from 1848 to 1856, there were scores of lawless killings but only three semilegal hangings.
A majority of Californians, as decent and lawabiding citizens needing protection, grappled earnestly with the problem of erecting an adequate state government.
Privately encouraged by President Taylor, they drafted a constitution in 1849 that excluded slavery and then boldly applied to Congress for admission.
California would thus bypass the usual territorial stage, thwarting southern congressmen seeking to block free soil.
Southern politicians, alarmed by the Californians impertinent stroke for freedom, arose in violent opposition.
Would California prove to be the golden straw that broke the back of the Union?
If a man is going to California, he announces it with some hesitation; because it is a confession that he has failed at home.
i tell you the woman are in great demand in this country no matter whether they are married or not you need not think strange if you see me coming home with some good looking man some of these times with a pocket full of rocks.
it is all the go here for Ladys to leave there Husbands two out of three do it there is a first rate Chance for a single woman she can have her choice of thousands i wish mother was here she could marry a rich man and not have to lift her hand to do her work.
C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 The South of 1850 was relatively well-off.
It then enjoyed, as it had from the beginning, more than its share of the nations leadership.
It had seated in the White House the war hero Zachary Taylor, a  Virginia-born, slaveowning planter from Louisiana.
It boasted a majority in the cabinet and on the Supreme Court.
If outnumbered in the House, the South had equality in the Senate, where it could at least neutralize northern maneuvers.
Its cotton fields were expanding, and cotton prices were profitably high.
Few sane people, North or South, believed that slavery was seriously threatened where it already existed below the Mason-Dixon line.
The fifteen slave states could easily veto any proposed constitutional amendment.
Yet the South was deeply worried, as it had been for several decades, by the ever-tipping political balance.
There were then fifteen slave states and fifteen free states.
The admission of California would destroy the delicate equilibrium in the Senate, perhaps forever.
Potential slave territory under the American flag was running short, if it had not in fact disappeared.
Agitation had already developed in the territories of New Mexico and Utah for admission as nonslave states.
The fate of California might well establish a precedent for the rest of the Mexican Cession territoryan area purchased largely with southern blood.
Texas nursed an additional grievance of its own.
It claimed a huge area east of the Rio Grande and north to the forty-second parallel, embracing in part about half the territory of present-day New Mexico.
The federal government was proposing to detach this prize, while hot-blooded Texans were threatening to descend upon Santa Fe and seize what they regarded as rightfully theirs.
The explosive quarrel foreshadowed shooting.
Many southerners were also angered by the nagging agitation in the North for the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia.
They looked with alarm on the prospect of a ten-mile-square oasis of free soil thrust between slaveholding Maryland and slaveholding Virginia.
Even more disagreeable to the South was the loss of runaway slaves, many of whom were assisted north by the Underground Railroad.
This virtual freedom train consisted of an informal chain of  stations (antislavery homes), through which scores of passengers (runaway slaves) were spirited by conductors (usually white and black abolitionists) from the slave states to the free-soil sanctuary of Canada.
The most amazing of these conductors was an illiterate runaway slave from Maryland, fearless Harriet Tubman.
During nineteen forays into the South, she rescued more than three hundred slaves, including her aged parents, and deservedly earned the title Moses.
Lively imaginations later exaggerated the role of the Underground Railroad and its stationmasters, but its existence was a fact.
By 1850 southerners were demanding a new and more stringent fugitive-slave law.
The old one, passed by Congress in 1793, had proved inadequate to cope with runaways, especially since unfriendly state authorities failed to provide needed cooperation.
Unlike cattle thieves, the abolitionists who ran the Underground Railroad did not gain personally from their lawlessness.
But to the slaveowners, the loss was infuriating, whatever the motives.
The moral judgments of the abolitionists seemed, in some ways, more galling than outright theft.
They reflected not only a holier-than-thou attitude but  a refusal to obey the laws solemnly passed by  Congress.
Estimates indicate that the South in 1850 was losing perhaps 1,000 runaways a year out of its total of some 4 million slaves.
In fact, more blacks probably gained their freedom by self-purchase or voluntary emancipation than ever escaped.
But the principle weighed heavily with the slavemasters.
They rested their argument on the Constitution, which protected slavery, and on the laws of Congress, which provided for slave-catching.
Although the loss of property is felt, said a southern senator, the loss of honor is felt still more.
Texas and the Disputed Area Before the  Compromise of 1850 ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; ;;;;;; yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy yyyyyy Santa Fe TEXAS 1850 WYOMING COLORADO KANSAS OKLAHOMA NEW MEXICO  Disputed area Present-day state boundaries ;; yy Southern fears were such that Congress was confronted with catastrophe in 1850.
Free-soil California was banging on the door for admission, and fire-eaters in the South were voicing ominous threats of secession.
The crisis brought into the congressional forum the most distinguished assemblage of statesmen since the Constitutional Convention of 1787the Old Guard of the dying generation and the young gladiators of the new.
That immortal trioClay, Calhoun, and Websterappeared together for the last time on the public stage.
Henry Clay, now seventy-three years of age, played a crucial role.
The Great Pacificator had come to the Senate from Kentucky to engineer his third great compromise.
The once-glamorous statesmanthough disillusioned, enfeebled, and racked by a cruel coughwas still eloquent, conciliatory, and captivating.
He proposed and skillfully defended a series of compromises.
He was ably seconded by thirty-seven-year-old Senator Stephen  A. Douglas of Illinois, the Little Giant (five feet  four inches), whose role was less spectacular but even more important.
Clay urged with all his persuasiveness that the North and South both make concessions and that the North partially yield by enacting a more feasible fugitive-slave law.
Senator John C. Calhoun, the Great Nullifier, then sixty-eight and dying of tuberculosis, championed the South in his last formal speech.
Too weak to deliver it himself, he sat bundled up in the Senate chamber, his eyes glowing within a stern face, while a younger colleague read his fateful words.
Although approving the purpose of Clays proposed concessions, Calhoun rejected them as not providing adequate safeguards.
His impassioned plea was to leave slavery alone, return runaway slaves, give the South its rights as a minority, and restore the political balance.
He had in view, as was later revealed, an utterly unworkable scheme of electing two presidents, one from the North and one from the South, each wielding a veto.
Calhoun died in 1850, before the debate was over, murmuring the sad words, The South!
The South!
God knows what will become of her!
Appreciative fellow citizens in Charleston erected to his memory an imposing monument, which bore the inscription Truth, Justice, and the Constitution.
Calhoun had labored to preserve the Union and had taken his stand on the Constitution, but his proposals in their behalf almost undid both.
Daniel Webster next took the Senate spotlight to uphold Clays compromise measures in his last great speech, a three-hour effort.
Now sixty-eight years old and suffering from a liver complaint aggravated by high living, he had lost some of the fire in his magnificent voice.
Speaking deliberately and before overflowing galleries, he urged all reasonable concessions to the South, including a new fugitive-slave law with teeth.
As for slavery in the territories, asked Webster, why legislate on the subject?
To do so was an act of sacrilege, for Almighty God had already passed the Wilmot Proviso.
The good Lord had decreed through climate, topography, and geographythat a plantation economy, and hence a slave economy, could not profitably exist in the Mexican Cession territory.
* Webster sanely concluded that compromise, concession, and sweet reasonableness would provide the only solutions.
Let us not be pygmies, he pleaded, in a case that calls for men.
If measured by its immediate effects, Websters famed Seventh of March speech, 1850, was his finest.
It helped turn the tide in the North toward compromise.
The clamor for printed copies became so great that Webster mailed out more than 100,000, remarking that 200,000 would not satisfy the demand.
His tremendous effort visibly strengthC HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 *Webster was wrong here; within one hundred years, California had become one of the great cotton-producing states of the Union.
I opened a paper to-day in which he [Webster] pounds on the old strings [of liberty] in a letter to the Washington Birthday feasters at New York.
Liberty!
liberty!
Pho!
Let Mr.
Webster, for decencys sake, shut his lips once and forever on this word.
The word  in the mouth of Mr.
Webster sounds like the word  in the mouth of a courtesan.
ened Union sentiment.
It was especially pleasing to the banking and commercial centers of the North, which stood to lose millions of dollars by secession.
One prominent Washington banker canceled two notes of Websters, totaling $5,000, and sent him  a personal check for $1,000 and a message of  congratulations.
But the abolitionists, who had assumed Webster was one of them, upbraided him as a traitor, worthy of bracketing with Benedict Arnold.
The poet Whittier lamented, These reproaches were most unfair.
Webster, who had long regarded slavery as evil but disunion as worse, had, in fact, always despised the abolitionists and never joined their ranks.
The stormy congressional debate of 1850 was not finished, for the Young Guard from the North were yet to have their say.
This was the group of newer leaders who, unlike the aging Old Guard, had not grown up with the Union.
They were more interested in purging and purifying it than in patching and preserving it.
William H. Seward, the wiry and husky-throated freshman senator from New York, was the able spokesman for many of the younger northern radicals.
A strong antislaveryite, he came out unequivocally against concession.
He seemed not to realize that compromise had brought the Union together and that when the sections could no longer compromise, they would have to part company.
Seward argued earnestly that Christian legislators must obey Gods moral law as well as mans mundane law.
He therefore appealed, with reference to excluding slavery in the territories, to an even higher law than the Constitution.
This alarming phrase, wrenched from its context, may have cost him the presidential nomination and the presidency in 1860.
California admitted as a free state The remainder of the Mexican Cession area to be formed into the territories of New Mexico and Utah, without restriction on slavery, hence open to popular sovereignty Territory disputed by Texas and New Mexico to be Texas to receive $10 million from the federal  surrendered to New Mexico government as compensation Abolition of the slave trade (but not slavery) in the A more stringent fugitive-slave law, going beyond that District of Columbia of 1793 As the great debate in Congress ran its heated course, deadlock seemed certain.
Blunt old President Taylor, who had allegedly fallen under the influence of men like Higher Law Seward, seemed bent on vetoing any compromise passed by Congress.
His military ire was aroused by the threats of Texas to seize Santa Fe.
He appeared to be doggedly determined to Jacksonize the dissenters, if need be, by leading an army against the Texans in person and hanging all damned traitors.
If troops had begun to march, the South probably would have rallied to the defense of Texas, and the Civil War might have erupted in 1850.
At the height of the controversy in 1850, President Taylor unknowingly helped the cause of concession by dying suddenly, probably of an acute intestinal disorder.
Portly, round-faced Vice President Millard Fillmore, a colorless and conciliatory New York lawyer-politician, took over the reins.
As presiding officer of the Senate, he had been impressed with the arguments for conciliation, and he gladly signed the series of compromise measures that passed Congress after seven long months of stormy debate.
The balancing of interests in the Compromise of 1850 was delicate in the extreme.
The struggle to get these measures accepted by the country was hardly less heated than in Congress.
In the northern states, Union savers like Senators Clay, Webster, and Douglas orated on behalf of the compromise.
The ailing Clay himself delivered more than seventy speeches, as a powerful sentiment for acceptance gradually crystallized in the North.
It was strengthened by a growing spirit of goodwill, which sprang partly from a feeling of relief and partly from an upsurge of prosperity enriched by California gold.
But the fire-eaters of the South were still violently opposed to concessions.
One extreme South Carolina newspaper avowed that it loathed the Union and hated the North as much as it did Hell itself.
A movement in the South to boycott northern goods gained some headway, but in the end the southern Unionists, assisted by the warm glow of prosperity, prevailed.
In mid-1850 an assemblage of southern extremists had met in Nashville, Tennessee, ironically near the burial place of Andrew Jackson.
The delegates not only took a strong position in favor of slavery but condemned the compromise measures then being hammered out in Congress.
Meeting again later in the year after the bills had passed, the convention proved to be a dud.
By that time southern opinion had reluctantly accepted the verdict of Congress.
Like the calm after a storm, a second Era of Good Feelings dawned.
Disquieting talk of secession subsided.
Peace-loving people, both North and South, were determined that the compromises should be a finality and that the explosive issue of slavery should be buried.
But this placid period of reason proved all too brief.
Who got the better deal in the Compromise of 1850?
The answer is clearly the North.
California, as a free state, tipped the Senate balance permanently against the South.
The territories of New Mexico and Utah were open to slavery on the basis of popular sovereignty.
But the iron law of naturethe highest law of allhad loaded the dice in favor of free soil.
The southerners urgently needed more slave territory to restore the sacred balance.
If they could not carve new states out of the recent conquests from Mexico, where else might they get them?
In the Caribbean was one answer.
Even the apparent gains of the South rang hollow.
Disgruntled Texas was to be paid $10 million toward discharging its indebtedness, but in the long run this was a modest sum.
The immense area in dispute had been torn from the side of slaveholding Texas and was almost certain to be free.
The South had halted the drive toward abolition in the District of Columbia, at least temporarily, by permitting the outlawing of the slave  But even this move was an entering wedge toward complete emancipation in the nations capital.
Most alarming of all, the drastic new Fugitive Slave Law of 1850the Bloodhound Billstirred up a storm of opposition in the North.
The fleeing slaves could not testify in their own behalf,  and they were denied a jury trial.
These harsh practices, some citizens feared, threatened to create dangerous precedents for white Americans.
The federal commissioner who handled the case of a fugitive would C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 receive five dollars if the runaway were freed and ten dollars if notan arrangement that strongly resembled a bribe.
Freedom-loving northerners who aided the slave to escape were liable to heavy fines and jail sentences.
They might even be ordered to join the slave-catchers, and this possibility rubbed salt into old sores.
So savage was this Man-Stealing Law that it touched off an explosive chain reaction in the North.
Many shocked moderates, hitherto passive, were driven into the swelling ranks of the antislaveryites.
When a runaway slave from Virginia was captured in Boston in 1854, he had to be removed from the city under heavy federal guard through streets lined with OREGON TERR.
CALIF.
UTAH TERR.
INDIAN TERR.
MICH.
N.Y.
MINNESOTA TERR.
IOWA UNORGANIZED TERR.
ARK.
TEX.
NEW MEXICO TERR.
MISS.
ALA.. GA.
FLA.
TENN.
N.C.
S.C.
OHIO IND.
ILL.
WISC.
N.H.
MASS.
R.I.
CONN.
N.J.
DEL.
D.C.
(Slave trade prohibited in District of Columbia) Free Slave Decision left to territory Slavery After the Compromise  of 1850 Regarding the Fugitive Slave Act provisions of the Compromise of 1850, Ralph Waldo Emerson declared (May 1851) at Concord, Massachusetts, The act of Congress .
is a law which every one of you will break on the earliest occasiona law which no man can obey, or abet the obeying, without loss of self-respect and forfeiture of the name of gentleman.
Privately he wrote in his  , This filthy enactment was made in the nineteenth century, by people who could  read and write.
I will not obey it, by God.
sullen Yankees and shadowed by black-draped buildings festooned with flags flying upside down.
One prominent Bostonian who witnessed this grim spectacle wrote that we went to bed one night oldfashioned, conservative, Compromise Union Whigs and waked up stark mad Abolitionists.
The Underground Railroad stepped up its timetable, and infuriated northern mobs rescued slaves from their pursuers.
Massachusetts, in a move toward nullification suggestive of South Carolina in 1832, made it a penal offense for any state official to enforce the new federal statute.
Other states passed personal liberty laws, which denied local jails to federal officials and otherwise hampered enforcement.
The abolitionists rent the heavens with their protests against the man-stealing statute.
A meeting presided over by William Lloyd Garrison in 1851 declared, We execrate it, we spit upon it, we trample it under our feet.
Beyond question, the Fugitive Slave Law was an appalling blunder on the part of the South.
No single irritant of the 1850s was more persistently galling to both sides, and none did more to awaken in the North a spirit of antagonism against the South.
The southerners in turn were embittered because the northerners would not in good faith execute the lawthe one real and immediate southern gain from the Great Compromise.
Slavecatchers, with some success, redoubled their efforts.
Should the shooting showdown have come in 1850?
From the standpoint of the secessionists, yes; from the standpoint of the Unionists, no.
Time was fighting for the North.
With every passing decade, this huge section was forging further ahead in population and wealthin crops, factories, foundries, ships, and railroads.
Delay also added immensely to the moral strength of the Northto its will to fight for the Union.
In 1850 countless thousands of northern moderates were unwilling to pin the South to the rest of the nation with bayonets.
But the inflammatory events of the 1850s did much to bolster the Yankee will to resist secession, whatever the cost.
This one feverish decade gave the North time to accumuC HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 The Legal Status of Slavery, from the Revolution to the Civil War late the material and moral strength that provided the margin of victory.
Thus the Compromise of 1850, from one point of view, won the Civil War for the Union.
Meeting in Baltimore, the Democratic nominating convention of 1852 startled the nation.
Hopelessly deadlocked, it finally stampeded to the second  dark-horse candidate in American history, an unrenowned lawyer-politician, Franklin Pierce, from the hills of New Hampshire.
The Whigs tried to jeer him back into obscurity with the cry, Who is Frank Pierce?
Democrats replied, The Young Hickory of the Granite Hills.
Pierce was a weak and indecisive figure.
Youngish, handsome, militarily erect, smiling, and convivial, he had served without real distinction in the Mexican War.
As a result of a painful groin injury that caused him to fall off a horse, he was known as the Fainting General, though scandalmongers pointed to a fondness for alcohol.
But he was enemyless because he had been inconspicuous, and as a prosouthern northerner, he was acceptable to the slavery wing of the Democratic party.
His platform came out emphatically for the finality of the Compromise of 1850, Fugitive Slave Law and all.
The Whigs, also convening in Baltimore, missed a splendid opportunity to capitalize on their record in statecraft.
Able to boast of a praiseworthy achievement in the Compromise of 1850, they might logically have nominated President Fillmore or Senator Webster, both of whom were associated with it.
But having won in the past only with military heroes, they turned to another, Old Fuss and Feathers Winfield Scott, perhaps the ablest American general of his generation.
Although he was a huge and impressive figure, his manner bordered on haughtiness.
His personality not only repelled the masses but eclipsed his genuinely statesmanlike achievements.
The Whig platform praised the Compromise of 1850 as a lasting arrangement, though less enthusiastically than the Democrats.
With slavery and sectionalism to some extent soft-pedaled, the campaign again degenerated into a dull and childish attack on personalities.
Democrats ridiculed Scotts pomposity; Whigs charged that Pierce was the hero of many a well-fought  in 44; well Pierce em in 52.
Luckily for the Democrats, the Whig party was hopelessly split.
Antislavery Whigs of the North swallowed Scott as their nominee but deplored his platform, which endorsed the hated Fugitive Slave Law.
The current phrase ran, We accept the candidate but spit on the platform.
Southern Whigs, who doubted Scotts loyalty to the Compromise of 1850 and especially the Fugitive Slave Law, accepted the platform but spat on the candidate.
More than five thousand Georgia Whigsfinality menvoted in vain for Webster, although he had died nearly two weeks before the election.
General Scott, victorious on the battlefield, met defeat at the ballot box.
His friends remarked whimsically that he was not used to running.
Actually, he was stabbed in the back by his fellow Whigs, notably in the South.
The pliant Pierce won in a landslide, 254 electoral votes to 42, although the popular count was closer, 1,601,117 to 1,385,453.
The election of 1852 was fraught with frightening significance, though it may have seemed tame at the time.
It marked the effective end of the disorganized Whig party and, within a few years, its complete death.
The Whigs demise augured the eclipse of  erned at times by the crassest opportunism, and they won only two presidential elections (1840, 1848) in their colorful career, both with war heroes.
They finally choked to death trying to swallow the distasteful Fugitive Slave Law.
But their great contributionand a noteworthy one indeedwas to  help uphold the ideal of the Union through their electoral strength in the South and through the  eloquence of leaders like Henry Clay and Daniel Webster.
Both of these statesmen, by unhappy coincidence, died during the 1852 campaign.
But the good they had done lived after them and contributed powerfully to the eventual preservation of a united United States.
At the outset the Pierce administration displayed vigor.
The new president, standing confidently before some fifteen thousand people on inauguration day, delivered from memory a clear-voiced inaugural address.
His cabinet contained aggressive southerners, including as secretary of war one Jefferson Davis, future president of the Confederacy.
The people of Dixie were determined to acquire more slave territory, and the compliant Pierce was prepared to be their willing tool.
The intoxicating victories of the Mexican War stimulated the spirit of Manifest Destiny.
The conquest of a Pacific frontage, and the discovery of gold on it, aroused lively interest in the transisthmian land routes of Central America, chiefly in Panama and Nicaragua.
Many Americans were looking even further ahead to potential canal routes and to the islands flanking them, notably Spains Cuba.
These visions especially fired the ambitions of the slavocrats.
They lusted for new territory after the Compromise of 1850 seemingly closed most  of the lands of the Mexican Cession to the peculiar institution.
In 1856 a Texan proposed a toast that was drunk with gusto: To the Southern republic bounded on the north by the Mason and Dixon line and on the South by the Isthmus of Tehuantepec [southern Mexico], including Cuba and all other lands on our Southern shore.
Southerners took a special interest in Nicaragua.
A brazen American adventurer, William Walker, tried repeatedly to grab control of this Central American country in the 1850s.
(He had earlier attempted and failed to seize Baja California from Mexico and turn it into a slave state.
) Backed by an armed force recruited largely in the South, he installed himself as president in July 1856 and promptly legalized slavery.
One southern newspaper proclaimed to the planter aristocracy that Walkerthe gray-eyed man of destinynow offers Nicaragua to you and your slaves, at a time when you have not a friend on the face of the earth.
But a coalition of Central American nations formed an alliance to overthrow him.
President Pierce withdrew diplomatic recognition, and the gray-eyed mans destiny was to crumple before a Honduran firing squad in 1860.
Nicaragua was also of vital concern to Great Britain, the worlds leading maritime and commercial power.
Fearing that the grasping Yankees would monopolize the trade arteries there, the British made haste to secure a solid foothold at Greytown, the eastern end of the proposed Nicaraguan canal route.
This challenge to the Monroe Doctrine forthwith raised the ugly possibility of an armed clash.
The crisis was surmounted in 1850 by the ClaytonBulwer Treaty, which stipulated that neither America nor Britain would fortify or secure exclusive control over any future isthmian waterway.
This agreement, at the time, seemed necessary to halt the British, but to American canal promoters in later years, it proved to be a ball and chain.
C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 Isthmus of Tehuantepec NICARAGUA HONDURAS BELIZE (BRITISH HONDURAS) GUATEMALA SALVADOR COSTA RICA COLOMBIA (NEW GRANADA) CUBA (Spanish) JAMAICA (British) Proposed canal route, then a land-and-water route Future Panama Canal British agents and traders influence natives Greytown Central America, c.
1850, Showing British Possessions and Proposed Canal Routes Until President Theodore Roosevelt swung into action with his big stick in 1903, a Nicaraguan canal, closer to the United States, was generally judged more desirable than  a canal across Panama.
America had become a Pacific power with the acquisition of California and Oregon, both of which faced Asia.
The prospects of a rich trade with the Far East now seemed rosier.
Americans had already established contacts with China, and shippers were urging Washington to push for commercial intercourse with Japan.
The mikados empire, after some disagreeable experiences with the European world, had withdrawn into a cocoon of isolationism and had remained there for over two hundred years.
The Japanese were so protective of their insularity that they prohibited shipwrecked foreign sailors from leaving and refused to readmit to Japan their own sailors who had been washed up on the West Coast of North America.
But by 1853, as events proved, Japan was ready to emerge from reclusion, partly because of the Russian menace.
The Washington government was now eager to pry open the bamboo gates of Japan.
It dispatched a fleet of awesome, smoke-belching warships, commanded by Commodore Matthew C. Perry, brother of the hero of the Battle of Lake Erie in 1813.
By a judicious display of force and tact, he persuaded the Japanese in 1854 to sign a memorable treaty.
It provided for only a commercial foot in the door, but it was the beginning of an epochal relationship between the Land of the Rising Sun and the Western world.
Ironically, this achievement attracted little notice at the time, partly because Perry devised no memorable slogan.
Sugar-rich Cuba, lying off the nations southern doorstep, was the prime objective of Manifest Destiny in the 1850s.
Supporting a large population of enslaved blacks, it was coveted by the South as the most desirable slave territory available.
Carved into several states, it would once more restore the political balance in the Senate.
Cuba was a kind of heirloomthe most important remnant of Spains once-mighty New World empire.
Polk, the expansionist, had taken steps to offer $100 million for it, but the sensitive Spaniards had replied that they would see it sunk into the ocean before they would sell it to the Americans at any price.
With purchase completely out of the question, seizure was apparently the only way to pluck the ripening fruit.
Private adventurers from the South now undertook to shake the tree of Manifest Destiny.
During 18501851 two filibustering expeditions (from the Spanish  each numbering several hundred armed men, descended upon Cuba.
Both feeble efforts were repelled, and the last one ended in tragedy when the leader and fifty followerssome of them from the best families of the Southwere summarily shot  or strangled.
So outraged were the southerners that an angry mob sacked Spains consulate in New Orleans.
Spanish officials in Cuba rashly forced a showdown in 1854, when they seized an American steamer,   the time for President Pierce, dominated as he was by the South, to provoke a war with Spain and seize Cuba.
The major powers of EuropeEngland, France, and Russiawere about to become bogged down in the Crimean War and hence were unable to aid Spain.
An incredible cloak-and-dagger episode followed.
The secretary of state instructed the American ministers in Spain, England, and France to prepare confidential recommendations for the acquisition of Cuba.
Meeting initially at Ostend,  Belgium, the three envoys drew up a top-secret dispatch, soon known as the Ostend Manifesto.
This startling document urged that the administration offer $120 million for Cuba.
If Spain refused, and if its continued ownership endangered American interests, the United States would be justified in wresting the island from the Spanish.
The secret Ostend Manifesto quickly leaked out.
Northern free-soilers, already angered by the Fugitive Slave Law and other gains for slavery, rose in an outburst of wrath against the manifesto of brigands.
Confronted with disruption at home, the redfaced Pierce administration was forced to drop its brazen schemes for Cuba.
Clearly the slavery issue, like a two-headed snake with the heads at each others throat, deadlocked territorial expansion in the 1850s.
The North, flushed with Manifest Destiny, was developing a renewed appetite for Canada.
The South coveted Cuba.
Neither section would permit the other to get the apple of its eye, so neither got either.
The shackled black hands of Harriet Beecher Stowes Uncle Tom, whose plight had already stung the conscience of the North, now held the South back from Cuba.
The internal distresses of the United States were such that, for once, it could not take advantage of Europes distressesin this case the Crimean War.
Acute transportation problems were another  legacy of the Mexican War.
The newly acquired prizes of California and Oregon might just as well have been islands some eight thousand miles west of the nations capital.
The sea routes to and from the Isthmus of Panama, to say nothing of those around South America, were too long.
Coveredwagon travel past bleaching animal bones was  possible, but slow and dangerous.
A popular song recalled, Feasible land transportation was imperative or the newly won possessions on the Pacific Coast might break away.
Camels were even proposed as the answer.
Several score of these temperamental beastsships of the desertwere imported from the Near East, but mule-driving Americans did not adjust to them.
A transcontinental railroad was clearly the only real solution to the problem.
Railroad promoters, both North and South, had projected many drawing-board routes to the Pacific Coast.
But the estimated cost in all cases was so great that for many years there could obviously be only one line.
Should its terminus be in the North or in the South?
The favored section would reap rich rewards in wealth, population, and influence.
The South, losing the economic race with the North, was eager to extend a railroad through adjacent southwestern territory all the way to California.
Another chunk of Mexico now seemed desirable, because the campaigns of the recent war had shown that the best railway route ran slightly south of the Mexican border.
Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Mississippian, arranged to have James Gadsden, a prominent South Carolina railroad man, appointed minister to Mexico.
Finding Santa Anna C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854  That the highwaymans plea, that might makes right, embodied in the Ostend Circular, was in every respect unworthy of American diplomacy, and would bring shame and dishonor upon any Government or people that gave it their sanction.
in power for the sixth and last time, and as usual in need of money, Gadsden made gratifying headway.
He negotiated a treaty in 1853, which ceded to the United States the Gadsden Purchase area for $10 million.
The transaction aroused much criticism among northerners, who objected to paying a huge sum for a cactus-strewn desert nearly the size of Gadsdens South Carolina.
Undeterred, the Senate approved the pact, in the process shortsightedly eliminating a window on the Sea of Cortez.
No doubt the Gadsden Purchase enabled the South to claim the coveted railroad with even greater insistence.
A southern track would be easier to build because the mountains were less high and because the route, unlike the proposed northern lines, would not pass through unorganized territory.
Texas was already a state at this point, and New Mexico (with the Gadsden Purchase added) was a formally organized territory, with federal troops available to provide protection against marauding tribes of Indians.
Any northern or central railroad line would have to be thrust through the unorganized territory of Nebraska, where the buffalo and Indians roamed.
Northern railroad boosters quickly replied that if organized territory were the test, then Nebraska should be organized.
Such a move was not premature, because thousands of land-hungry pioneers were already poised on the Nebraska border.
But all schemes proposed in Congress for organizing the territory were greeted with apathy or hostility by many southerners.
Why should the South help create new free-soil states and thus cut its own throat by facilitating a northern railroad?
At this point in 1854, Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois delivered a counterstroke to offset the Gadsden thrust for southern expansion westward.
A squat, bull-necked, and heavy-chested figure, the Little Giant radiated the energy and breezy optimism of the self-made man.
An ardent booster for the West, he longed to break the North-South deadlock over westward expansion and stretch a line of settlements across the continent.
He had also invested heavily in Chicago real estate and in railway stock and was eager to have the Windy City become the eastern terminus of the proposed Pacific railroad.
He would thus endear himself to the voters of Illinois, benefit his section, and enrich his own purse.
A veritable steam engine in breeches, Douglas threw himself behind a legislative scheme that would enlist the support of a reluctant South.
The proposed Territory of Nebraska would be sliced into two territories, Kansas and Nebraska.
Their status regarding slavery would be settled by popular sovereigntya democratic concept to which Douglas and his western constituents were deeply attached.
Kansas, which lay due west of slaveholding Missouri, would presumably choose to become a slave The Gadsden Purchase, 1853 Los Angeles Tucson El Paso Houston CALIFORNIA MEXICO TEXAS NEW MEXICO TERRITORY Gadsen Purchase Future route of the Southern Pacific Railroad (completed in 1882) state.
But Nebraska, lying west of free-soil Iowa, would presumably become a free state.
Douglass Kansas-Nebraska scheme ran headlong into a formidable political obstacle.
The Missouri Compromise of 1820 had forbidden slavery in the proposed Nebraska Territory, which lay north of the sacred 36 30' line, and the only way to open the region to popular sovereignty was to repeal the ancient compact outright.
This bold step Douglas was prepared to take, even at the risk of shattering the uneasy truce patched together by the Compromise of 1850.
Many southerners, who had not conceived of Kansas as slave soil, rose to the bait.
Here was a chance to gain one more slave state.
The pliable President Pierce, under the thumb of southern advisers, threw his full weight behind the KansasNebraska Bill.
But the Missouri Compromise, now thirty-four years old, could not be brushed aside lightly.
Whatever Congress passes it can repeal, but by this time the North had come to regard the sectional pact as almost as sacred as the Constitution itself.
Free-soil members of Congress struck back with a vengeance.
They met their match in the violently gesticulating Douglas, who was the ablest rough-and-tumble debater of his generation.
Employing twisted logic and oratorical fireworks, he rammed the bill through Congress, with strong support from many southerners.
So heated were political passions that bloodshed was barely averted.
Some members carried a concealed revolver or a bowie knifeor both.
Douglass motives in prodding anew the snarling dog of slavery have long puzzled historians.
His perC HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 sonal interests have already been mentioned.
In addition, his foes accused him of angling for the presidency in 1856.
Yet his admirers have argued plausibly in his defense that if he had not championed the ill-omened bill, someone else would have.
The truth seems to be that Douglas acted somewhat impulsively and recklessly.
His heart did not bleed over the issue of slavery, and he declared repeatedly that he did not care whether it was voted up or down in the territories.
What he failed to perceive was that hundreds of thousands of his fellow citizens in the North  issue.
They regarded the repeal of the Missouri Compromise as an intolerable breach of faith, and they would henceforth resist to the last trench all future southern demands for slave territory.
As Abraham Lincoln said, the North wanted to give to pioneers in the West a clean bed, with no snakes in it.
Genuine leaders, like skillful chess players, must foresee the possible effects of their moves.
Douglas predicted a hell of a storm, but he grossly underestimated its proportions.
His critics in the North, branding him a Judas and a traitor, greeted his name with frenzied boos, hisses, and three groans for Doug.
But he still enjoyed a high degree of popularity among his following in the Democratic party, especially in Illinois, a stronghold of popular  sovereignty.
The Kansas-Nebraska Acta curtain raiser to a  terrible dramawas one of the most momentous measures ever to pass Congress.
By one way of reckoning, it greased the slippery slope to Civil War.
Antislavery northerners were angered by what they condemned as an act of bad faith by the  Nebrascals and their Nebrascality.
All future annuls all past compromises with slavery, and makes all future compromises impossible.
Thus it puts freedom and slavery face to face, and bids them grapple.
Who can doubt the result?
Kansas and Nebraska, 1854 The future Union Pacific Railroad (completed in 1869) is shown.
Note the Missouri Compromise line of  36 30' (1820).
NEBRASKA TERRITORY OREGON TERRITORY UTAH TERRITORY NEW MEXICO TERRITORY TEXAS INDIAN TERR.
ARKANSAS TERR.
MISSOURI IOWA ILLINOIS WISCONSIN MINNESOTA TERRITORY KANSAS TERRITORY C A N A D A WASH.
TERR.
Ogden Omaha compromise with the South would be immeasurably more difficult, and without compromise there was bound to be conflict.
Henceforth the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, previously enforced in the North only halfheartedly, was a dead letter.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act wrecked two compromises: that of 1820, which it repealed specifically, and that of 1850, which northern opinion repealed indirectly.
Emerson wrote, The Fugitive [Slave] Law did much to unglue the eyes of men, and now the Nebraska Bill leaves us staring.
Northern abolitionists and southern fire-eaters alike saw less and less they could live with.
The growing legion of antislaveryites gained numerous recruits, who resented the grasping move by the slavocracy for Kansas.
The southerners, in turn, became inflamed when the free-soilers tried to control Kansas, contrary to the presumed deal.
The proud Democratsa party now over half  a century oldwere shattered by the KansasNebraska Act.
They did elect a president in 1856, but he was the last one they were to boost into the White House for twenty-eight long years.
Undoubtedly the most durable offspring of the Kansas-Nebraska blunder was the new Republican party.
It sprang up spontaneously in the Middle West, notably in Wisconsin and Michigan, as a mighty moral protest against the gains of slavery.
Gathering together dissatisfied elements, it soon included disgruntled Whigs (among them Abraham Lincoln), Democrats, Free-Soilers, Know-Nothings, and other foes of the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
The hodgepodge party spread eastward with the swiftness of a prairie fire and with the zeal of a religious crusade.
Unheardof and unheralded at the beginning of 1854, it elected a Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives within two years.
Never really a third-party movement, it erupted with such force as to become almost overnight the second major political party and a purely sectional one at that.
At long last the dreaded sectional rift had appeared.
The new Republican party would not be allowed south of the Mason-Dixon line.
Countless southerners subscribed wholeheartedly to the sentiment that it was a nigger stealing, stinking, putrid, abolition party.
The Union was in dire peril.
C HAPTER 18 Renewing the Sectional Struggle, 18481854 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends  Mexican War Taylor defeats Cass and Van Buren for presidency California gold rush Fillmore assumes presidency after Taylors death Compromise of 1850, including Fugitive Slave Law Clayton-Bulwer Treaty with Britain Pierce defeats Scott for presidency Gadsden Purchase from Mexico Commodore Perry opens Japan Ostend Manifesto proposes seizure of Cuba Kansas-Nebraska Act Republican party organized William Walker becomes president of Nicaragua and legalizes slavery For further reading, see page A13 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Drifting Toward Disunion  18541861 A BRAHAM L INCOLN , 1858 T he slavery question continued to churn the cauldron of controversy throughout the 1850s.
As moral temperatures rose, prospects for a peaceful political solution to the slavery issue simply evaporated.
Kansas Territory erupted in violence between proslavery and antislavery factions in 1855.
Two years later the Supreme Courts Dred Scott decision invalidated the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which had imposed a shaky lid on the slavery problem for more than a generation.
Attitudes on both sides progressively hardened.
When in 1860 the newly formed Republican party nominated for president Abraham Lincoln, an outspoken opponent of the further expansion of slavery, the stage was set for all-out civil war.
Sectional tensions were further strained in 1852, and later, by an inky phenomenon.
Harriet Beecher Stowe, a wisp of a woman and the mother of a halfdozen children, published her heartrending novel Fugitive Slave Law, she was determined to awaken the North to the wickedness of slavery by laying bare its terrible inhumanity, especially the cruel splitting of families.
Her wildly popular book relied on powerful imagery and touching pathos.
God wrote it, she explained in later yearsa reminder that the deeper sources of her antislavery sentiments lay in the evangelical religious crusades of the Second Great Awakening.
The success of the novel at home and abroad was sensational.
Several hundred thousand copies were published in the first year, and the totals soon ran into the millions as the tale was translated into more than a score of languages.
It was also put on the stage in Tom shows for lengthy runs.
No other novel in American historyperhaps in all history can be compared with it as a political force.
To millions of people, it made slavery appear almost as evil as it really was.
When Mrs.
Stowe was introduced to President Lincoln in 1862, he reportedly remarked with twinkling eyes, So youre the little woman who wrote the book that made this great war.
The truth is that win it.
The South condemned that vile wretch in petticoats when it learned that hundreds of thousands of fellow Americans were reading and believing her unfair indictment.
Mrs.
Stowe had never witnessed slavery at first hand in the Deep South, but she had seen it briefly during a visit to Kentucky, and she had lived for many years in Ohio, a center of Underground Railroad activity.
Uncle Tom, endearing and enduring, left a profound impression on the North.
Uncounted thousands of readers swore that henceforth they would have nothing to do with the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law.
The tale was devoured by millions of impressionable youths in the 1850ssome of whom later became the Boys in Blue who volunteered to fight the Civil War through to its grim finale.
The memory of a beaten and dying Uncle Tom helped sustain them in their determination to wipe out the plague of slavery.
The novel was immensely popular abroad, especially in Britain and France.
Countless readers wept over the kindly Tom and the angelic Eva, while deploring the brutal Simon Legree.
When the guns in America finally began to boom, the common C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 people of England sensed that the triumph of the North would spell the end of the black curse.
The governments in London and Paris seriously considered intervening in behalf of the South, but they were sobered by the realization that many of their own people, aroused by the Tom-mania, might not support them.
Another trouble-brewing book appeared in 1857, five years after the debut of Uncle Tom.
Titled Hinton R. Helper, a nonaristocratic white from North Carolina.
Hating both slavery and blacks, he attempted to prove by an array of statistics that indirectly the nonslaveholding whites were the ones who suffered most from the millstone of slavery.
Unable to secure a publisher in the South, he finally managed to find one in the North.
Helpers influence was negligible among the poorer whites to whom he addressed his message.
His book, with its dirty allusions, was banned in the South, where book-burning parties were held.
But in the North, untold thousands of copies, many novels pose tricky problems  to historians, whose principal  objective is to get the factual  record straight.
Works of the imagination are notoriously unreliable as descriptions of reality; and only rarely is it known with any degree of certainty what a reader might have felt when confronting a particular fictional passage or theme.
Yet a novel like Harriet Beecher Stowes  guably large impact on the  American (and worldwide) debate over slavery that historians have inevitably looked to it for evidence of the mid-nineteenthcentury ideas and attitudes to which Stowe appealed.
The passage quoted here is especially rich in such evidenceand even offers an explanation for the logic of the novels title.
Stowe cleverly aimed to mobilize not simply her readers sense of injustice, but also their sentiments, on behalf of the antislavery cause.
Why is the  described here so central to Stowes novel?
What sentimental values does the cabin represent?
What is the nature of the threat to those values?
What does it say about nineteenth-century  American culture that Stowes appeal to sentiment succeeded so much more dramatically in exciting antislavery passions than did the factual and moral arguments of many other (mostly male) abolitionists?
in condensed form, were distributed as campaign literature by the Republicans.
Southerners were further embittered when they learned that their northern brethren were spreading these wicked lies.
Thus did southerners, reacting much as they did to to sleep under the same federal roof with their hostile Yankee bedfellows.
The rolling plains of Kansas had meanwhile been providing an example of the worst possible workings of popular sovereignty, although admittedly under abnormal conditions.
Newcomers who ventured into Kansas were a motley lot.
Most of the northerners were just ordinary westward-moving pioneers in search of richer lands beyond the sunset.
But a small part of the inflow was financed by groups of northern abolitionists or free-soilers.
The most famous of these antislavery organizations was the New England Emigrant Aid Company, which sent about two thousand people to the troubled area to forestall the Southand also to make a profit.
Shouting Ho for Kansas, many of them carried the deadly new breech-loading Sharps rifles, nicknamed Beechers Bibles after the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher (Harriet Beecher Stowes brother), who had helped raise money for their purchase.
Many of the Kansas-bound pioneers sang Whittiers marching song (1854): Southern spokesmen, now more than ordinarily touchy, raised furious cries of betrayal.
They had supported the Kansas-Nebraska scheme of Douglas with the unspoken understanding that Kansas would become slave and Nebraska free.
The northern Nebrascals, allegedly by foul means, were now apparently out to abolitionize  Nebraska.
A few southern hotheads, quick to respond in kind, attempted to assist small groups of wellarmed slaveowners to Kansas.
Some carried banners proclaiming, C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 No!
my soul ant yours Masr!
You havent bought itye cant buy it!
Its been bought and paid for by One that is able to keep it.
No matter, no matter, you cant harm me!
I cant said Legree, with a sneer; well seewell see!
Here, Sambo, Quimbo, give this dog such a breakin in as he wont get over this month!
Bleeding Kansas, 18541860 Enter every election district in Kansas .
and vote at the point of a bowie knife or revolver, one proslavery agitator exhorted a Missouri crowd.
Proslavery Missouri senator David Atchison declared that there are 1,100 men coming over from Platte County to vote, and if that aint enough we can send 5,000enough to kill every Goddamned abolitionist in the Territory.
NEBRASKA TERRITORY UTAH TERR.
NEW MEXICO TERRITORY INDIAN TERRITORY MISSOURI KANSAS TERRITORY Present-day  Kansas But planting blacks on Kansas soil was a losing game.
Slaves were valuable and volatile property, and foolish indeed were owners who would take them where bullets were flying and where the soil might be voted free under popular sovereignty.
The census of 1860 found only 2 slaves among 107,000 souls in all Kansas Territory and only 15 in Nebraska.
There was much truth in the charge that the whole quarrel over slavery in the territories revolved around an imaginary Negro in an impossible place.
Crisis conditions in Kansas rapidly worsened.
When the day came in 1855 to elect members of the first territorial legislature, proslavery border ruffians poured in from Missouri to vote early and often.
The slavery supporters triumphed and then set up their own puppet government at Shawnee Mission.
The free-soilers, unable to stomach this fraudulent conspiracy, established an extralegal regime of their own in Topeka.
The confused Kansans thus had their choice between two governmentsone based on fraud, the other on illegality.
Tension mounted as settlers also feuded over conflicting land claims.
The breaking point came in 1856 when a gang of proslavery raiders, alleging provocation, shot up and burned a part of the freesoil town of Lawrence.
This outrage was but the prelude to a bloodier tragedy.
The fanatical figure of John Brown now stalked upon the Kansas battlefield.
Spare, gray-bearded, and iron-willed, he was obsessively dedicated to the abolitionist cause.
The power of his glittering gray eyes was such, so he claimed, that his stare could force a dog or cat to slink out of a room.
Becoming involved in dubious dealings, including horse stealing, he moved to Kansas from Ohio with a part of his large family.
Brooding over the recent attack on Lawrence, Old Brown of Osawatomie led a band of his followers to Pottawatomie Creek in May 1856.
There they literally hacked to pieces five surprised men, presumed to be proslaveryites.
This fiendish butchery, clearly the product of a deranged mind, besmirched the free-soil cause and brought vicious retaliation from the proslavery forces.
Civil war in Kansas, which thus flared forth in 1856, continued intermittently until it merged with the large-scale Civil War of 18611865.
Altogether, the Kansas conflict destroyed millions of dollars worth of property, paralyzed agriculture in certain areas, and cost scores of lives.
Yet by 1857 Kansas had enough people, chiefly free-soilers, to apply for statehood on a popularsovereignty basis.
The proslavery forces, then in the saddle, devised a tricky document known as the Lecompton Constitution.
The people were not allowed to vote for or against the constitution as a whole, but for the constitution either with slavery or with no slavery.
If they voted against slavery, one of the remaining provisions of the constitution would protect the owners of slaves already in Kansas.
So whatever the outcome, there would still be black bondage in Kansas.
Many free-soilers, infuriated by this ploy, boycotted the polls.
Left to themselves, the proslaveryites approved the constitution with slavery late in 1857.
The scene next shifted to Washington.
President Pierce had been succeeded by the no-less-pliable James Buchanan, who was also strongly under southern influence.
Blind to sharp divisions within his own Democratic party, Buchanan threw the weight of his administration behind the notorious Lecompton Constitution.
But Senator Douglas, who had championed true popular sovereignty, would have none of this semipopular fraudulency.
Deliberately tossing away his strong support in the South for the presidency, he fought courageously for fair play and democratic principles.
The outcome was a compromise that, in effect, submitted the  Lecompton Constitution to a popular vote.
The freesoil voters thereupon thronged to the polls and snowed it under.
Kansas remained a territory until 1861, when the southern secessionists left Congress.
President Buchanan, by antagonizing the numerous Douglas Democrats in the North, hopelessly divided the once-powerful Democratic party.
Until then, it had been the only remaining  for the Whigs were dead and the Republicans were sectional.
With the disruption of the Democrats came the snapping of one of the last important strands in the rope that was barely binding the Union together.
Bleeding Kansas also spattered blood on the floor of the Senate in 1856.
Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a tall and imposing figure, was a leading abolitionistone of the few prominent in political life.
Highly educated but cold, humorless, intolerant, and egotistical, he had made himself one of the most disliked men in the Senate.
Brooding over the turbulent miscarriage of popular sovereignty, he delivered a blistering speech titled The Crime Against Kansas.
Sparing few epithets, he condemned the proslavery men as hirelings picked from the drunken spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization.
He also referred insultingly to South Carolina and to its white-haired Senator Andrew Butler, one of the best-liked members of the Senate.
Hot-tempered Congressman Preston S. Brooks of South Carolina now took vengeance into his own hands.
Ordinarily gracious and gallant, he resented the insults to his state and to its senator, a distant cousin.
His code of honor called for a duel, but in the South one fought only with ones social equals.
And had not the coarse language of the Yankee, who probably would reject a challenge, dropped him to a lower order?
To Brooks, the only alternative was to chastise the senator as one would beat an unruly dog.
On May 22, 1856, he approached Sumner, then sitting at his Senate desk, and pounded the orator with an eleven-ounce cane until it broke.
The victim fell bleeding and unconscious to the floor, while several nearby senators refrained from interfering.
Sumner had been provocatively insulting, but this counteroutrage put Brooks in the wrong.
The House of Representatives could not muster enough votes to expel the South Carolinian, but he resigned and was triumphantly reelected.
Southern admirers deluged Brooks with canes, some of them goldheaded, to replace the one that had been broken.
The injuries to Sumners head and nervous system were serious.
He was forced to leave his seat for three and a half years and go to Europe for treatment that was both painful and costly.
Meanwhile, Massachusetts defiantly reelected him, leaving his C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 seat eloquently empty.
Bleeding Sumner was thus joined with bleeding Kansas as a political issue.
The free-soil North was mightily aroused against the uncouth and cowardly Bully Brooks.
Copies of Sumners abusive speech, otherwise doomed to obscurity, were sold by the tens of thousands.
Every blow that struck the senator doubtless made thousands of Republican votes.
The South, although not unanimous in approving Brooks, was angered not only because Sumner had made such an intemperate speech but because it had been so extravagantly applauded in the North.
The Sumner-Brooks clash and the ensuing reactions revealed how dangerously inflamed passions were becoming, North and South.
It was ominous that the cultured Sumner should have used the language of a barroom bully and that the gentlemanly Brooks should have employed the tactics and tools of a thug.
Emotion was displacing thought.
The blows rained on Sumners head were, broadly speaking, among the first blows of the Civil War.
With bullets whining in Kansas, the Democrats  met in Cincinnati to nominate their presidential  standard-bearer of 1856.
They shied away from both the weak-kneed President Pierce and the dynamic Douglas.
Each was too indelibly tainted by the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
The delegates finally chose James Buchanan (pronounced by many  anan), who was muscular, white-haired, and tall (six feet), with a short neck and a protruding chin.
Because of an eye defect, he carried his head cocked to one side.
A well-to-do Pennsylvania lawyer, he had been serving as minister to London during the recent Kansas-Nebraska uproar.
He was therefore Kansas-less, and hence relatively enemyless.
But in a crisis that called for giants, Old Buck Buchanan was mediocre, irresolute, and confused.
Delegates of the fast-growing Republican party met in Philadelphia with bubbling enthusiasm.
Higher Law Seward was their most conspicuous leader, and he probably would have arranged to win the nomination had he been confident that this  was a Republican year.
The final choice was Captain John C. Frmont, the so-called Pathfinder of  the Westa dashing but erratic explorer-soldiersurveyor who was supposed to find the path to the White House.
The black-bearded and flashy young adventurer was virtually without political experience, but like Buchanan he was not tarred with the Kansas brush.
The Republican platform came out vigorously against the extension of slavery into the territories, while the Democrats declared no less emphatically for popular sovereignty.
An ugly dose of antiforeignism was injected into the campaign, even though slavery extension loomed largest.
The recent influx of immigrants from Ireland and Germany had alarmed nativists, as many old-stock Protestants were called.
They organized the American party, known also as the Know-Nothing party because of its secretiveness, (Illinois State Journal)  Brooks and his Southern allies have deliberately adopted the monstrous creed that any man who dares to utter sentiments which they deem wrong or unjust, shall be brutally assailed.
Although Mr.
Brooks ought to have selected some other spot for the altercation than the Senate chamber, if he had broken every bone in Sumners carcass it would have been a just retribution upon this slanderer of the South and her individual citizens.
Independent,  Fellow-Christians!
Remember it is for Christ, for the nation, and for the world that you vote at this election!
Vote as you pray!
Pray as you vote!
and in 1856 nominated the lackluster ex-president Millard Fillmore.
Antiforeign and anti-Catholic, these superpatriots adopted the slogan Americans Must Rule America.
Remnants of the dying Whig  party likewise endorsed Fillmore, and they and the Know-Nothings threatened to cut into Republican strength.
Republicans fell in behind Frmont with the zeal of crusaders.
Shouting We Follow the Pathfinder and We Are Buck Hunting, they organized glee clubs, which sang (to the tune of the Marseillaise), And free love, sneered the Buchanan supporters (Buchaneers).
Mudslinging bespattered both candidates.
Old Fogy Buchanan was assailed because he was a bachelor: the fiance of his youth had died after a lovers quarrel.
Frmont was reviled because of his illegitimate birth, for his young mother had left her elderly husband, a Virginia planter, to run away with a French adventurer.
In due season she gave birth to John in Savannah, Georgiafurther to shame the South.
More harmful to Frmont was the allegation, which alienated many bigoted Know-Nothings and other nativists, that he was a Roman Catholic.
A bland Buchanan, although polling less than a majority of the popular vote, won handily.
His tally in the Electoral College was 174 to 114 for Frmont, with Fillmore garnering 8.
The popular vote was 1,832,955 for Buchanan to 1,339,932 for Frmont, and 871,731 for Fillmore.
Why did the rousing Republicans go down to defeat?
Frmont lost much ground because of grave doubts as to his honesty, capacity, and sound judgment.
Perhaps more damaging were the violent threats of the southern fire-eaters that the election of a sectional Black Republican would be a declaration of war on them, forcing them to secede.
Many northerners, anxious to save both the Union and their profitable business connections with  the South, were thus intimidated into voting for Buchanan.
Innate conservatism triumphed, assisted by so-called southern bullyism.
C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 It was probably fortunate for the Union that secession and civil war did not come in 1856, following a Republican victory.
Frmont, an ill-balanced and second-rate figure, was no Abraham Lincoln.
And in 1856 the North was more willing to let the South depart in peace than in 1860.
Dramatic events from 1856 to 1860 were to arouse hundreds of thousands of still-apathetic northerners to a fighting pitch.
Yet the Republicans in 1856 could rightfully claim a victorious defeat.
The new partya mere two-year-old toddlerhad made an astonishing showing against the well-oiled Democratic machine.
Whittier exulted: The election of 1856 cast a long shadow forward, and politicians, North and South, peered anxiously toward 1860.
The Dred Scott decision, handed down by the Supreme Court on March 6, 1857, abruptly ended the two-day presidential honeymoon of the unlucky bachelor, James Buchanan.
This pronouncement was one of the opening paper-gun blasts of the Civil War.
Basically, the case was simple.
Dred Scott, a black slave, had lived with his master for five years in Illinois and Wisconsin Territory.
Backed by interested abolitionists, he sued for freedom on the basis of his long residence on free soil.
The Supreme Court proceeded to twist a simple legal case into a complex political issue.
It ruled, not surprisingly, that Dred Scott was a black slave and not a citizen, and hence could not sue in federal courts.
* The tribunal could then have thrown out the case on these technical grounds alone.
But a majority decided to go further, under the leadership of emaciated Chief Justice Taney from the slave state of Maryland.
A sweeping judgment on the larger issue of slavery in the territories seemed desirable, particularly to forestall arguments by two free-soil justices who were preparing dissenting opinions.
The prosouthern majority evidently hoped in this way to lay the odious question to rest.
Taneys thunderclap rocked the free-soilers back on their heels.
A majority of the Court decreed that because a slave was private property, he or she could be taken into  slavery.
The reasoning was that the Fifth Amendment clearly forbade Congress to deprive people  of their property without due process of law.
The Court, to be consistent, went further.
The Missouri  *This part of the ruling, denying blacks their citizenship, seriously menaced the precarious position of the Souths quartermillion free blacks.
WASHINGTON TERRITORY OREGON TERRITORY CALIF.
4 UTAH TERRITORY UNORGANIZED     TERR.
KANSAS TERRITORY MICH.
6 N.Y.
35 MINNESOTA TERRITORY IOWA 4 NEBRASKA TERRITORY MO.
9 ARK.
4 LA.
6 TEXAS 4 NEW MEXICO TERRITORY MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
10 FLA.
3 TENN.
12 N.C.
10 S.C.
8 VA.
15 PA.
27  OHIO 23 IND.
13 ILL.
11 WISC.
5 KY.
12 ME.
8 N.H.
5 VT.
5 MASS.
13 R.I.
4 CONN.
6 N.J.
7 DEL.
3 MD.
8 BuchananDemocratic FrmontRepublican FillmoreAmerican Presidential Election of 1856 (electoral vote by state) The fateful split of 1860 was foreshadowed.
The regional polarization in 1856, shown here, was to be even sharper four years later, as illustrated by the maps on page 426.
Compromise, banning slavery north of 36 30', had been repealed three years earlier by the KansasNebraska Act.
But its spirit was still venerated in the North.
Now the Court ruled that the Compromise of 1820 had been unconstitutional all along: Congress had no power to ban slavery from the territories, regardless even of what the territorial legislatures themselves might want.
Southerners were delighted with this unexpected victory.
Champions of popular sovereignty were aghast, including Senator Douglas and a host of northern Democrats.
Another lethal wedge was thus driven between the northern and southern wings of the once-united Democratic party.
Foes of slavery extension, especially the Republicans, were infuriated by the Dred Scott setback.
Their chief rallying cry had been the banishing of bondage from the territories.
They now insisted that the ruling of the Court was merely an opinion, not a decision, and no more binding than the views of a southern debating society.
Republican defiance of the exalted tribunal was intensified by an awareness that a majority of its members were southerners and by the conviction that it had debased itselfsullied the ermineby wallowing in the gutter of politics.
Southerners in turn were inflamed by all this defiance.
They began to wonder anew how much longer they could remain joined to a section that refused to honor the Supreme Court, to say nothing of the constitutional compact that had established it.
Bitterness caused by the Dred Scott decision was deepened by hard times, which dampened a period of feverish prosperity.
Late in 1857 a panic burst about Buchanans harassed head.
The storm was not so bad economically as the panic of 1837, but psychologically it was probably the worst of the nineteenth century.
C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 They had for more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order; and altogether unfit to associate with the white race, either in social or political relations; and so far inferior that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.
This opinion was at that time fixed and universal in the civilized portion of the white race, What caused the crash?
Inpouring California gold played its part by helping to inflate the currency.
The demands of the Crimean War had overstimulated the growing of grain, while frenzied speculation in land and railroads had further ripped the economic fabric.
When the collapse came, over five thousand businesses failed within a year.
Unemployment, accompanied by hunger meetings in urban areas, was widespread.
Bread or Death stated one desperate slogan.
The North, including its grain growers, was hardest hit.
The South, enjoying favorable cotton prices abroad, rode out the storm with flying colors.
Panic conditions seemed further proof that cotton stronger than that of the North.
This fatal delusion helped drive the overconfident southerners closer to a shooting showdown.
Financial distress in the North, especially in agriculture, gave a new vigor to the demand for free farms of 160 acres from the public domain.
For several decades interested groups had been urging the federal government to abandon its ancient policy of selling the land for revenue.
Instead, the argument ran, acreage should be given outright to the sturdy pioneers as a reward for risking health and life to develop it.
A scheme to make outright gifts of homesteads encountered two-pronged opposition.
Eastern industrialists had long been unfriendly to free land; some of them feared that their underpaid workers would be drained off to the West.
The South was even more bitterly opposed, partly because ganglabor slavery could not flourish on a mere 160 acres.
Free farms would merely fill up the territories more rapidly with free-soilers and further tip the political balance against the South.
In 1860, after years of debate, Congress finally passed a homestead act one that made public lands available at a nominal sum of twenty-five cents an acre.
But the homestead act was stabbed to death by the veto pen of President Buchanan, near whose elbow sat leading southern sympathizers.
The panic of 1857 also created a clamor for higher tariff rates.
Several months before the crash, Congress, embarrassed by a large Treasury surplus, had enacted the Tariff of 1857.
The new law, responding to pressures from the South, reduced duties to about 20 percent on dutiable goodsthe lowest point since the War of 1812.
Hardly had the revised rates been placed on the books when financial misery descended like a black pall.
Northern manufacturers, many of them Republicans, noisily blamed their misfortunes on the low tariff.
As the surplus melted away in the Treasury, industrialists in the North pointed to the need for higher duties.
But what really concerned them was their desire for increased protection.
Thus the panic of 1857 gave the Republicans two surefire economic issues for the election of 1860: protection for the unprotected and farms for the farmless.
The Illinois senatorial election of 1858 now claimed the national spotlight.
Senator Douglass term was about to expire, and the Republicans decided to run against him a rustic Springfield lawyer, one Abraham Lincoln.
The Republican candidate6 feet 4 inches in height and 180 pounds in weightpresented an awkward but arresting figure.
Lincolns legs, arms, and neck were grotesquely long; his head was crowned by coarse, black, and unruly hair; and his face was sad, sunken, and weather-beaten.
Lincoln was no silver-spoon child of the elite.
Born in 1809 in a Kentucky log cabin to impoverished parents, he attended a frontier school for not more than a year; being an avid reader, he was mainly self-educated.
All his life he said, git, thar, and heered.
Although narrow-chested and somewhat stoop-shouldered, he shone in his frontier community as a wrestler and weight lifter, and spent some time, among other pioneering pursuits, as a splitter of logs for fence rails.
A superb teller of earthy and amusing stories, he would oddly enough plunge into protracted periods of melancholy.
Lincolns private and professional life was not especially noteworthy.
He married above himself socially, into the influential Todd family of Kentucky; and the temperamental outbursts of his highstrung wife, known by her enemies as the she wolf, helped to school him in patience and forbearance.
After reading a little law, he gradually emerged as one of the dozen or so better-known trial lawyers  in Illinois, although still accustomed to carrying important papers in his stovepipe hat.
He was widely referred to as Honest Abe, partly because he would refuse cases that he had to suspend his conscience to defend.
The rise of Lincoln as a political figure was less than rocketlike.
After making his mark in the Illinois legislature as a Whig politician of the logrolling  variety, he served one undistinguished term in Congress, 18471849.
Until 1854, when he was forty-five years of age, he had done nothing to establish a claim to statesmanship.
But the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in that year lighted within him unexpected fires.
After mounting the Republican bandwagon, he emerged as one of the foremost politicians and orators of the Northwest.
At the Philadelphia convention of 1856, where John Frmont was nominated, Lincoln actually received 110 votes for the vice-presidential nomination.
Lincoln, as Republican nominee for the Senate seat, boldly challenged Douglas to a series of joint debates.
This was a rash act, because the stumpy senator was probably the nations most devastating debater.
Douglas promptly accepted Lincolns challenge, and seven meetings were arranged from August to October 1858.
At first glance the two contestants seemed ill matched.
The well-groomed and polished Douglas, with bearlike figure and bullhorn voice, presented a striking contrast to the lanky Lincoln, with his baggy clothes and unshined shoes.
Moreover, Old Abe, as he was called in both affection and derision, had a piercing, high-pitched voice and was often ill at ease when he began to speak.
But as he threw himself into an argument, he seemed to grow in height, while his glowing eyes lighted up a rugged face.
He relied on logic rather than on table-thumping.
The most famous debate came at Freeport, Illinois, where Lincoln nearly impaled his opponent on the horns of a dilemma.
Suppose, he queried, the people of a territory should vote slavery down?
The Supreme Court in the Dred Scott decision had C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 I presume you all know who I am.
I am humble Abraham Lincoln.
I have been solicited by many friends to become a candidate for the Legislature.
My [Whiggish] politics are short and sweet, like the old womans dance.
I am in favor of a national bank.
I am in favor of the internalimprovement system, and a high protective tariff.
These are my sentiments and political principles.
If elected, I shall be thankful; if not, it will be all the same.
decreed that they could not.
Who would prevail, the Court or the people?
Legend to the contrary, Douglas and some southerners had already publicly answered the Freeport question.
The Little Giant therefore did not hesitate to meet the issue head-on, honestly and consistently.
His reply to Lincoln became known as the Freeport Doctrine.
No matter how the Supreme Court ruled, Douglas argued, slavery would stay down if the people voted it down.
Laws to protect slavery would have to be passed by the territorial legislatures.
These would not be forthcoming in the absence of popular approval, and black bondage would soon disappear.
Douglas, in truth, had American history on his side.
Where public opinion does not support the federal government, as in the case of Jeffersons embargo, the law is almost impossible to enforce.
The upshot was that Douglas defeated Lincoln for the Senate seat.
The Little Giants loyalty to popular sovereignty, which still had a powerful appeal in Illinois, probably was decisive.
Senators were then chosen by state legislatures; and in the general election that followed the debates, more proDouglas members were elected than pro-Lincoln members.
Yet thanks to inequitable apportionment, I, as well as Judge Douglas, am in favor  of the race to which I belong, having the superior position.
I have never said anything to the contrary, but I hold that notwithstanding all this, there is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
I hold that he is as much entitled to those rights as the white man.
I agree with Judge Douglas he is not my equal in many respectscertainly not in color, perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment.
But in the right to eat the bread, without leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, he is my equal and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.
the districts carried by Douglas supporters represented a smaller population than those carried by Lincoln supporters.
Honest Abe thus won a clear moral victory.
Lincoln possibly was playing for larger stakes than just the senatorship.
Although defeated, he had shambled into the national limelight in company with the most prominent northern politicians.
Newspapers in the East published detailed accounts of the debates, and Lincoln began to emerge as a potential Republican nominee for president.
But Douglas, in winning Illinois, hurt his own chances of winning the presidency, while further splitting  his splintering party.
After his opposition to the Lecompton Constitution for Kansas and his further defiance of the Supreme Court at Freeport, southern Democrats were determined to break up the party (and the Union) rather than accept him.
The Lincoln-Douglas debate platform thus proved to be one of the preliminary battlefields of the Civil War.
The gaunt, grim figure of John Brown of bleeding Kansas infamy now appeared again in an even more terrible way.
His crackbrained scheme was to invade the South secretly with a handful of followers, call upon the slaves to rise, furnish them with arms, and establish a kind of black free state as a sanctuary.
Brown secured several thousand dollars for firearms from northern abolitionists and finally arrived in hilly western Virginia with some twenty men, including several blacks.
At scenic Harpers Ferry, he seized the federal arsenal in October 1859, incidentally killing seven innocent people, including a free black, and injuring ten or so more.
But the slaves, largely ignorant of Browns strike, failed to rise, and the wounded Brown and the remnants of his tiny band were quickly captured by U.S.
Marines under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Robert E. Lee.
Ironically, within two years Lee became the preeminent general in the Confederate army.
Old Brown was convicted of murder and treason after a hasty but legal trial.
His presumed insanity was supported by affidavits from seventeen friends and relatives, who were trying to save his neck.
Actually thirteen of his near relations were regarded as insane, including his mother and grandmother.
Governor Wise of Virginia would have been most wise, so his critics say, if he had only clapped the culprit into a lunatic asylum.
But BrownGods angry manwas given every opportunity to pose and to enjoy martyrdom.
Though probably of unsound mind, he was clever enough to see that he was worth much more to the abolitionist cause dangling from a rope than in any other way.
His demeanor during the trial was dignified and courageous, his last words (this  ful country) were to become legendary, and he marched up the scaffold steps without flinching.
His conduct was so exemplary, his devotion to freedom so inflexible, that he took on an exalted character, however deplorable his previous record may have been.
So the hangmans trap was sprung, and Brown plunged not into oblivion but into world fame.
A memorable marching song of the impending Civil War ran, C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 Ive been studying, and studying upon it, and its clar to me, it wasnt John Brown that died on that gallows.
When I think how he gave up his life for our people, and how he never flinched, but was so brave to the end; its clar to me it wasnt mortal man, it was God in him.
[The Brown] affair, in its philosophy, corresponds with the many attempts, related in history, at the assassination of kings and emperors.
An enthusiast broods over the oppression of a people till he fancies himself commissioned by Heaven to liberate them.
He ventures the attempt, which ends in little else than his own execution.
The effects of Harpers Ferry were calamitous.
In the eyes of the South, already embittered, Osawatomie Brown was a wholesale murderer and an apostle of treason.
Many southerners asked how they could possibly remain in the Union while  a murderous gang of abolitionists were financing armed bands to Brown them.
Moderate northerners, including Republican leaders, openly deplored this mad exploit.
But the South naturally concluded that the violent abolitionist view was shared by  the entire North, dominated by Brown-loving  Republicans.
Abolitionists and other ardent free-soilers were infuriated by Browns execution.
Many of them were ignorant of his bloody past and his even more bloody purposes, and they were outraged because the Virginians had hanged so earnest a reformer who was working for so righteous a cause.
On the day of his execution, free-soil centers in the North tolled bells, fired guns, lowered flags, and held  rallies.
Some spoke of Saint John Brown, and the serene Ralph Waldo Emerson compared the new martyr-hero with Jesus.
The gallows became a cross.
E. C. Stedman wrote, The ghost of the martyred Brown would not be laid to rest.
Beyond question the presidential election of 1860 was the most fateful in American history.
On it hung the issue of peace or civil war.
Deeply divided, the Democrats met in Charleston, South Carolina, with Douglas the leading candidate of the northern wing of the party.
But the southern fire-eaters regarded him as a traitor, as a result of his unpopular stand on the Lecompton Constitution and the Freeport Doctrine.
After a bitter wrangle over the platform, the delegates from most of the cotton states walked out.
When the remainder could not scrape together the necessary two-thirds vote for Douglas, the entire body dissolved.
The first tragic secession was the secession of southerners from the Democratic National Convention.
Departure became habit-forming.
The Democrats tried again in Baltimore.
This time the Douglas Democrats, chiefly from the North, were firmly in the saddle.
Many of the  cotton-state delegates again took a walk, and  the rest of the convention enthusiastically nominated their hero.
The platform came out squarely for popular sovereignty and, as a sop to the South, against obstruction of the Fugitive Slave Law by the states.
Angered southern Democrats promptly organized a rival convention in Baltimore, in which many of the northern states were unrepresented.
They selected as their leader the stern-jawed vice president, John C. Breckinridge, a man of moderate C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 The seceders intended from the beginning to rule or ruin; and when they find they cannot rule, they will then ruin.
They have about enough power for this purpose; not much more; and I doubt not but they will use it.
Envy, hate, jealousy, spite .
will make devils of men.
The secession movement was instigated by nothing but bad passions.
views from the border state of Kentucky.
The platform favored the extension of slavery into the territories and the annexation of slave-populated Cuba.
A middle-of-the-road group, fearing for the Union, hastily organized the Constitutional Union party, sneered at as the Do Nothing or Old Gentlemans party.
It consisted mainly of former Whigs and Know-Nothings, a veritable gathering of graybeards.
Desperately anxious to elect a compromise candidate, they met in Baltimore and nominated for the presidency John Bell of Tennessee.
They went into battle ringing hand bells for Bell and waving handbills for The Union, the Constitution, and the Enforcement of the Laws.
Elated Republicans were presented with a heavensent opportunity.
Scenting victory in the breeze as their opponents split hopelessly, they gathered in Chicago in a huge, boxlike wooden structure called the Wigwam.
William H. Seward was by far the best known of the contenders.
But his radical utterances, including his irrepressible conflict speech at Rochester in 1858, had ruined his prospects.
* His numerous enemies coined the slogan Success Rather Than Seward.
Lincoln, the favorite son of Illinois, was definitely a Mr.
Second Best, but he was a stronger candidate because he had made fewer enemies.
Overtaking Seward on the third  ballot, he was nominated amid scenes of the wildest excitement.
The Republican platform had a seductive appeal for just about every important nonsouthern group: for the free-soilers, nonextension of slavery; for the northern manufacturers, a protective tariff; for the immigrants, no abridgment of rights; for the Northwest, a Pacific railroad; for the West, internal improvements at federal expense; and for the farmers, free homesteads from the public domain.
Alluring slogans included Vote Yourselves a Farm and Land for the Landless.
Southern secessionists promptly served notice that the election of the baboon Lincolnthe abolitionist rail-splitterwould split the Union.
In fact, Honest Abe, though hating slavery, was no outright abolitionist.
As late as February 1865, he was inclined to favor cash compensation to the owners of freed slaves.
But for the time being, he saw fit, perhaps mistakenly, to issue no statements to quiet southern fears.
He had already put himself on record; and fresh statements might stir up fresh antagonisms.
As the election campaign ground noisily forward, Lincoln enthusiasts staged roaring rallies and parades, complete with pitch-dripping torches and oilskin capes.
They extolled High Old Abe, the Woodchopper of the West, and the Little Giant Killer, while groaning dismally for Poor Little Doug.
Enthusiastic Little Giants and Little Dougs retorted with We want a statesman, not a rail-splitter, as President.
Douglas himself waged a vigorous speaking campaign, even in the South, and threatened to put the hemp with his own hands around the neck of the first secessionist.
Lincoln 1,865,593 39.79% 180 (every vote of the free states  except for 3 of New Jerseys 7  votes) Douglas 1,382,713 29.40 12 (only Missouri and 3 of New  Jerseys 7 votes) Breckinridge 848,356 18.20 72 (all the cotton states) Bell 592,906 12.61 39 (Virginia, Kentucky,  Tennessee) *Seward had referred to an irrepressible conflict between slavery and freedom, though not necessarily a bloody one.
The returns, breathlessly awaited, proclaimed a sweeping victory for Lincoln (see the table on p.
425).
Awkward Abe Lincoln had run a curious race.
To a greater degree than any other holder of the nations highest office (except John Quincy Adams), he was a minority president.
Sixty percent of the voters preferred some other candidate.
He was also a sectional president, for in ten southern states, where he was not allowed on the ballot, he polled no popular votes.
The election of 1860 was virtually two elections: one in the North, the other in the South.
South Carolinians rejoiced over Lincolns victory; they now had their excuse to secede.
In winning the North, the rail-splitter had split off the South.
Douglas, though scraping together only twelve electoral votes, made an impressive showing.
Boldly breaking with tradition, he campaigned energetically for himself.
(Presidential candidates customarily maintained a dignified silence.
) He drew important strength from all sections and ranked a fairly close second in the popular-vote column.
In fact, the Douglas Democrats and the Breckinridge C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 WASHINGTON TERR.
NEBRASKA TERR.
UNORGANIZED TERR.
UNORGANIZED    TERR.
KANSAS TERR.
NEW MEXICO TERR.
UTAH TERR.
ORE.
3 CALIF.
4 TEX.
4 LA.
6 ARK.
4 MO.
9 IOWA 4 MINN.
4 WIS.
5 ILL.
11 IND.
13 MICH.
6 OHIO 23 KY.
12 TENN.
12 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
10 FLA.
3 S.C.
8 N.C.
10 VA.
15 PA.
27 N.Y.
35 ME.
8 MD.
8 DEL.
3 N.J.
4 & 3 CONN.
6 R.I.
4 MASS.
13 N.H.
5   VT.
5 WASHINGTON TERR.
NEBRASKA TERR.
UNORGANIZED TERR.
UNORGANIZED    TERR.
KANSAS TERR.
NEW MEXICO TERR.
UTAH TERR.
LincolnRepublican BreckinridgeDemocratic BellConstitutional Union DouglasDemocratic No votes cast Presidential Election of 1860  (electoral vote by state) It is a surprising fact that Lincoln, often rated among the greatest presidents, ranks near the bottom  in percentage of popular votes.
In all the eleven states that seceded, he received only a scattering of one states votesabout 1.5 percent  in Virginia.
Presidential Election of 1860  (showing popular vote by county) The vote by county for Lincoln was virtually all cast in the North.
The northern Democrat, Douglas, was also nearly shut out in the South, which divided its votes between Breckinridge and Bell.
(Note that  only citizens of states could vote; inhabitants of territories could not.
) Democrats together amassed 365,476 more votes than did Lincoln.
A myth persists that if the Democrats had only united behind Douglas, they would have triumphed.
Yet the cold figures tell a different story.
Even if the Little Giant had received all the electoral votes cast for all three of Lincolns opponents, the rail-splitter would have won, 169 to 134 instead of 180 to 123.
Lincoln still would have carried the populous states of the North and the Northwest.
On the other hand, if the Democrats had not broken up, they could have entered the campaign with higher enthusiasm and better organization and might have won.
Significantly, the verdict of the ballot box did not indicate a strong sentiment for secession.
Breckinridge, while favoring the extension of slavery, was no disunionist.
Although the candidate of the fireeaters, in the slave states he polled fewer votes than the combined strength of his opponents, Douglas and Bell.
He even failed to carry his own Kentucky.
Yet the South, despite its electoral defeat, was not badly off.
It still had a five-to-four majority on the Supreme Court.
Although the Republicans had elected Lincoln, they controlled neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives.
The federal government could not touch slavery in those states where it existed except by a constitutional amendment, and such an amendment could be defeated by one-fourth of the states.
The fifteen slave states numbered nearly one-half of the totala fact not fully appreciated by southern firebrands.
But a tragic chain reaction of secession now began to erupt.
South Carolina, which had threatened to go out if the sectional Lincoln came in, was as good as its word.
Four days after the election of the Illinois baboon by insulting majorities, its legislature voted unanimously to call a special convention.
Meeting at Charleston in December 1860, South Carolina unanimously voted to secede.
During the next six weeks, six other states of the lower South, though somewhat less united, followed the leader over the precipice: Alabama, Mississippi, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas.
Four more were to join them later, bringing the total to eleven.
With the eyes of destiny upon them, the seven seceders, formally meeting at Montgomery, Alabama, in February 1861, created a government known as the Confederate States of America.
As their president they chose Jefferson Davis, a dignified and austere recent member of the U.S.
Senate from Mississippi.
He was a West Pointer and a former cabinet member with wide military and administrative experience; but he suffered from chronic Southern Opposition to Secession, 18601861 (showing vote by county) This county vote shows the opposition of the antiplanter, antislavery mountain whites in the Appalachian region.
There was also considerable resistance to secession in Texas, where Governor Sam Houston, who led the Unionists, was deposed by secessionists.
Against secession For secession Conventions divided No returns available TEX.
ARK.
MISS.
TENN.
N.C.
S.C.
ALA.
FLA.
ill-health, as well as from a frustrated ambition to be a Napoleonic strategist.
The crisis, already critical enough, was deepened by the lame duck* interlude.
Lincoln, although elected president in November 1860, could not take office until four months later, March 4, 1861.
During this period of protracted uncertainty, when he was still a private citizen in Illinois, seven of the eleven deserting states pulled out of the Union.
President Buchanan, the aging incumbent, has been blamed for not holding the seceders in the Union by sheer forcefor wringing his hands instead of secessionist necks.
Never a vigorous man and habitually conservative, he was now nearly seventy, and although devoted to the Union, he was surrounded by prosouthern advisers.
As an able lawyer wedded to the Constitution, he did not believe that the southern states could legally secede.
Yet he could find no authority in the Constitution for stopping them with guns.
Oh for one hour of Jackson!
cried the advocates of strong-arm tactics.
But Old Buck Buchanan was not Old Hickory, and he was faced with a far more complex and serious problem.
One important reason why he did not resort to force was that the tiny standing army of some fifteen thousand men, then widely scattered, was urgently needed to control the Indians in the West.
Public opinion in the North, at that time, was far from willing to unsheathe the sword.
Fighting would merely shatter all prospects of adjustment, and until the guns began to boom, there was still a flickering hope of reconciliation rather than a contested divorce.
The weakness lay not so much in Buchanan as in the Constitution and in the Union itself.
Ironically, when Lincoln became president in March, he C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 *The lame duck period was shortened to ten weeks in 1933 by the Twentieth Amendment (see the Appendix).
If the cotton States shall decide that they can do better out of the Union than in it, we insist on letting them go in peace.
The right to secede may be a revolutionary one, but it exists nevertheless.
Whenever a considerable section of our Union shall deliberately resolve to go out, we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in.
We hope never to live in a republic, whereof one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets.
essentially continued Buchanans wait-and-see  policy.
Impending bloodshed spurred final and frantic attempts at compromisein the American tradition.
The most promising of these efforts was sponsored by Senator James Henry Crittenden of Kentucky, on whose shoulders had fallen the mantle of a fellow Kentuckian, Henry Clay.
The proposed Crittenden amendments to the Constitution were designed to appease the South.
Slavery in the territories was to be prohibited north of 36 30', but south of that line it was to be given federal protection in all territories existing or hereafter to be acquired (such as Cuba).
Future states, north or south of 36 30', could come into the Union with or without slavery, as they should choose.
In short, the slavery supporters were to be guaranteed full rights in the southern territories, as long as they were territories, regardless of the wishes of the majority under popular sovereignty.
Federal protection in a territory south of 36 30' might conceivably, though improbably, turn the entire area permanently to slavery.
Lincoln flatly rejected the Crittenden scheme, which offered some slight prospect of success, and all hope of compromise evaporated.
For this refusal he must bear a heavy responsibility.
Yet he had been elected on a platform that opposed the extension of slavery, and he felt that as a matter of principle, he could not afford to yield, even though gains for slavery in the territories might be only temporary.
NEBRASKA TERR.
UNORG.
TERR.
KANSAS TERR.
UNORG.
TERR.
NEW MEXICO TERR.
UTAH TERR.
WASHINGTON TERR.
ORE.
CALIF.
TEXAS   Slavery prohibited during  territorial status, thereby virtually assuring free-soil states Slavery protected during territorial status; states might be either slave or free Proposed Crittenden Compromise, 1860 Stephen A. Douglas claimed that if the Crittenden proposition could have been passed early in the session [of Congress], it would have saved all the States, except South Carolina.
But Crittendens proposal was doomed Lincoln opposed it, and Republicans  cast not a single vote in its favor.
I firmly believe that the slave-holding South is now the controlling power of the worldthat no other power would face us in hostility.
Cotton, rice, tobacco, and naval stores command the world; and we have sense to know it, and are sufficiently Teutonic to carry it out successfully.
The North without us would be a motherless calf, bleating about, and die of mange and starvation.
Larger gains might come later in Cuba and Mexico.
Crittendens proposal, said Lincoln, would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people, tribe, and state owning a foot of land between here and Tierra del Fuego.
As for the supposedly spineless Old Fogy Buchanan, how could he have prevented the Civil War by starting a civil war?
No one has yet come up with a satisfactory answer.
If he had used force on South Carolina in December 1860, the fighting almost certainly would have erupted three months sooner than it did, and under less favorable circumstances for the Union.
The North would have appeared as the heavy-handed aggressor.
And the crucial Border States, so vital to the Union, probably would have been driven into the arms of their wayward sisters.
Secessionists who parted company with their sister states left for a number of avowed reasons, mostly relating in some way to slavery.
They were alarmed by the inexorable tipping of the political balance against themthe despotic majority of numbers.
The crime of the North, observed James Russell Lowell, was the census returns.
Southerners were also dismayed by the triumph of the new sectional Republican party, which seemed to threaten their rights as a slaveholding minority.
They were weary of free-soil criticism, abolitionist nagging, and northern interference, ranging from the Underground Railroad to John Browns raid.
All we ask is to be let alone, declared Confederate president Jefferson Davis in an early message to his congress.
C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 Many southerners supported secession because they felt sure that their departure would be unopposed, despite Yankee yawp to the contrary.
They were confident that the clodhopping and codfishing Yankee would not or could not fight.
They believed that northern manufacturers and bankers, so heavily dependent on southern cotton and markets, would not dare to cut their own economic throats with their own unionist swords.
But should war come, the immense debt owed to northern creditors by the Southhappy thoughtcould be promptly repudiated, as it later was.
Southern leaders regarded secession as a golden opportunity to cast aside their generations of vassalage to the North.
An independent Dixieland could develop its own banking and shipping and trade directly with Europe.
The low Tariff of 1857, passed largely by southern votes, was not in itself menacing.
But who could tell when the greedy Republicans would win control of Congress and drive through their own oppressive protective tariff?
For decades this fundamental friction had pitted the North, with its manufacturing plants, against the South, with its agricultural exports.
Worldwide impulses of nationalismthen stirring in Italy, Germany, Poland, and elsewherewere fermenting in the South.
This huge area, with its distinctive culture, was not so much a section as a subnation.
It could not view with complacency the possibility of being lorded over, then or later, by what it regarded as a hostile nation of northerners.
The principles of self-determinationof the Declaration of Independenceseemed to many southerners to apply perfectly to them.
Few, if any, of the seceders felt that they were doing anything wrong or immoral.
The thirteen original states had voluntarily entered the Union, and now sevenultimately elevensouthern states were voluntarily withdrawing from it.
Historical parallels ran even deeper.
In 1776 thirteen American colonies, led by the rebel George Washington, had seceded from the British Empire by throwing off the yoke of King George III.
In 18601861, eleven American states, led by the rebel Jefferson Davis, were seceding from the Union by throwing off the yoke of King Abraham Lincoln.
With that burden gone, the South was confident that it could work out its own peculiar destiny more quietly, happily, and prosperously.
The contest is really for empire on the side of the North, and for independence on that of the South, and in this respect we recognize an exact analogy between the North and the Government of George III, and the South and the Thirteen Revolted Provinces.
Atlantic Monthly  The fault of the free States in the eyes of the South is not one that can be atoned for by any yielding of special points here and there.
Their offense is that they are free, and that their habits and prepossessions are those of freedom.
Their crime is the census of 1860.
Their increase in numbers, wealth, and power is a standing aggression.
It would not be enough to please the Southern States that we should stop asking them to abolish slavery: what they demand of us is nothing less than that we should abolish the spirit of the age.
Our very thoughts are a menace.
C HAPTER 19 Drifting Toward Disunion, 18541861 Harriet Beecher Stowe publishes  Kansas-Nebraska Act Republican party forms Buchanan defeats Frmont and Fillmore for presidency Sumner beaten by Brooks in Senate chamber Browns Pottawatomie Massacre Civil war in bleeding Kansas Dred Scott decision Lecompton Constitution rejected Panic of 1857 Tariff of 1857 Hinton R. Helper publishes  Lincoln-Douglas debates Brown raids Harpers Ferry Lincoln wins four-way race for presidency South Carolina secedes from the Union Crittenden Compromise fails Seven seceding states form the Confederate States of America ew topics have generated as much controversy among American historians as the causes of the Civil War.
The very names employed to describe  the conflictnotably Civil War or War Between the States, or even War for Southern Independencereveal much about the various authors points of view.
Interpretations of the great conflict have naturally differed according to section, and have been charged with both emotional and moral fervor.
Yet despite long and keen interest in the origins of the conflict, the causes of the Civil War remain as passionately debated today as they were a century ago.
The so-called Nationalist School of the late nineteenth century, typified in the work of historian James Ford Rhodes, claimed that slavery caused the Civil War.
Defending the necessity and inevitability of the war, these northern-oriented historians credited the conflict with ending slavery and preserving the Union.
But in the early twentieth century, progressive historians, led by Charles and Mary Beard, presented a more skeptical interpretation.
The Beards argued that the war was not fought over slavery per se, but rather was a deeply rooted economic struggle between an industrial North and an agricultural South.
Anointing the Civil War the Second American Revolution, the Beards claimed that the war precipitated vast changes in American class relations and shifted the political balance of power by magnifying the influence of business magnates and industrialists while destroying the plantation aristocracy of the South.
Shaken by the disappointing results of World War I, a new wave of historians argued that the Civil War, too, had actually been a big mistake.
Rejecting the nationalist interpretation that the clash was inevitable, James G. Randall and Avery Craven asserted that the war had been a repressible conflict.
Neither slavery nor the economic differences between North and South were sufficient causes for war.
Instead Craven and others attributed the bloody confrontation to the breakdown of political institutions, the passion of overzealous reformers, and the ineptitude of a blundering generation of political leaders.
Following the Second World War, however, a neonationalist view regained authority, echoing the earlier views of Rhodes in depicting the Civil War as an unavoidable conflict between two societies, one slave and one free.
For Allan Nevins and David M. Potter, irreconcilable differences in morality, politics, culture, social values, and economies increasingly eroded the ties between the sections and inexorably set the United States on the road to Civil War.
Eric Foner and Eugene Genovese have emphasized each sections nearly paranoid fear that the survival of its distinctive way of life was threatened by the expansion of the other section.
In  most northerners detested slavery not because it enslaved blacks, but because its existenceand particularly its rapid extensionthreatened the position of free white laborers.
This free labor ideology increasingly became the foundation stone upon which the North claimed its superiority over the South.
Eugene Genovese has argued that the South felt similarly endangered.
Convinced that the southern labor system was more humane than  the northern factory system, southerners saw northern designs to destroy their way of life lurking at every turnand every territorial battle.
Some historians have placed party politics at the center of their explanations for the war.
For them, no event was more consequential than the breakdown of the Jacksonian party system.
When the slavery issue tore apart both the Democratic and the Whig parties, the last ligaments binding the nation together were snapped, and the war inevitably came.
More recently, historians of the Ethnocultural School, especially Michael Holt, have acknowledged the significance of the collapse of the established parties, but have offered a different analysis of how that breakdown led to war.
They note that the two great national parties before the 1850s focused attention on issues such as the tariff, banking, and internal improvements, thereby muting sectional differences over slavery.
According to this argument, the erosion of the traditional party system is blamed not on growing differences over slavery, but on a temporary  parties in the 1850s on almost all national issues phere, the slavery issue rose to the fore, encouraging the emergence of Republicans in the North and secessionists in the South.
In the absence of regular, national, two-party conflict over economic issues, purely regional parties (like the Republicans) coalesced.
They identified their opponents not simply as competitors for power but as threats to their way of life, even to the life of the Republic itself.
For further reading, see page A13 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Girding for War: The North and  the South  18611865 A BRAHAM L INCOLN , M AY 7, 1861 A braham Lincoln solemnly took the presidential oath of office on March 4, 1861, after having slipped into Washington at night, partially disguised to thwart assassins.
He thus became president not of the  United States of America.
Seven had already departed; eight more teetered on the edge.
The girders of the unfinished Capitol dome loomed nakedly in the background, as if to symbolize the imperfect state of the Union.
Before the nation was restored and the slaves freed at lastthe American people would endure four years of anguish and bloodshed, and Lincoln would face tortuous trials of leadership such as have been visited upon few presidents.
Lincolns inaugural address was firm yet conciliatory: there would be no conflict unless the South provoked it.
Secession, the president declared, was wholly impractical, because physically speaking, we cannot separate.
Here Lincoln put his finger on a profound geographical truth.
The North and South were Siamese twins, bound inseparably together.
If they had been divided by the Pyrenees Mountains or the Danube River, a sectional divorce might have been more feasible.
But the Appalachian Mountains and the mighty Mississippi River both ran the wrong way.
Uncontested secession would create new controversies.
What share of the national debt should the South be forced to take with it?
What portion of the jointly held federal territories, if any, should the Confederate states be allottedareas so largely won with southern blood?
How would the fugitive-slave issue be resolved?
The Underground Railroad would certainly redouble its activity, and it would have to transport its passengers only across the Ohio River, not all the way to Canada.
Was it conceivable that all such problems could have been solved without ugly armed clashes?
A   paramount republic in the Western Hemisphere.
If this powerful democracy should break into two hostile parts, the European nations would be delighted.
They could gleefully transplant to America their ancient concept of the balance of power.
Playing the no-less-ancient game of divide and conquer, they could incite one snarling fragment of the dis-United States against the other.
The colonies of the European powers in the New World, notably those of Britain, would thus be made safer against the rapacious Yankees.
And European imperialists, with no unified republic to stand across their path, could more easily defy the Monroe Doctrine and seize territory in the Americas.
The issue of the divided Union came to a head over the matter of federal forts in the South.
As the seceding states left, they had seized the United States arsenals, mints, and other public property within their borders.
When Lincoln took office, only two significant forts in the South still flew the Stars and Stripes.
The more important of the pair was squarewalled Fort Sumter, in Charleston harbor, with fewer than a hundred men.
Ominously, the choices presented to Lincoln by Fort Sumter were all bad.
This stronghold had provisions that would last only a few weeksuntil the middle of April 1861.
If no supplies were forthcoming, its commander would have to surrender without firing a shot.
Lincoln, quite understandably, did not feel that such a weak-kneed course squared with his obligation to protect federal property.
But  if he sent reinforcements, the South Carolinians would undoubtedly fight back; they could not tolerate a federal fort blocking the mouth of their most important Atlantic seaport.
After agonizing indecision, Lincoln adopted a middle-of-the-road solution.
He notified the South Carolinians that an expedition would be sent to  Southern eyes provision spelled reinforcement.
A Union naval force was next started on its way to Fort Sumtera move that the South regarded as an act of aggression.
On April 12, 1861, the cannon of the Carolinians opened fire on the fort, while crowds in Charleston applauded and waved handkerchiefs.
After a thirty-four-hour bombardment, which took no lives, the dazed garrison surrendered.
The shelling of the fort electrified the North, which at once responded with cries of Remember Fort Sumter and Save the Union.
Hitherto countless Northerners had been saying that if the Southern states wanted to go, they should not be pinned to the rest of the nation with bayonets.
Wayward sisters, depart in peace was a common sentiment, I would demand explanations from Spain and France, categorically, at once.
I would seek explanations from Great Britain and Russia.
And, if satisfactory explanations are not received from Spain and France .
would convene Congress and declare war against them.
expressed even by the commander of the army, war hero General Winfield Scott, now so feeble at  seventy-five that he had to be boosted onto his horse.
But the assault on Fort Sumter provoked the North to a fighting pitch: the fort was lost, but the Union was saved.
Lincoln had turned a tactical defeat into a calculated victory.
Southerners had wantonly fired upon the glorious Stars and Stripes, and honor demanded an armed response.
Lincoln promptly (April 15) issued a call to the states for  seventy-five thousand militiamen, and volunteers sprang to the colors in such enthusiastic numbers that many were turned awaya mistake that was not often repeated.
On April 19 and 27, the president proclaimed a leaky blockade of Southern  seaports.
The call for troops, in turn, aroused the South much as the attack on Fort Sumter had aroused the North.
Lincoln was now waging warfrom the Southern view an aggressive waron the Confederacy.
Virginia, Arkansas, and Tennessee, all of which had earlier voted down secession, reluctantly joined their embattled sister states, as did North Carolina.
Thus the seven states became eleven as the  submissionists and Union shriekers were overcome.
Richmond, Virginia, replaced Montgomery, Alabama, as the Confederate capitaltoo near Washington for strategic comfort on either side.
The only slave states left were the crucial Border States.
This group consisted of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, Delaware, and later West Virginiathe mountain white area that somewhat illegally tore itself from the side of Virginia in mid-1861.
If the North had fired the first shot, some or all of these doubtful states probably would have seceded, and the South might well have succeeded.
The border C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game.
Kentucky gone, we cannot hold Missouri, nor, I think, Maryland.
These all against us, and the job on our hands is too large for us.
We would as well consent to separation at once, including the surrender of this capital [Washington].
group actually contained a white population more than half that of the entire Confederacy.
Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri would almost double the manufacturing capacity of the South and increase by nearly half its supply of horses and mules.
The strategic prize of the Ohio River flowed along the northern border of Kentucky and West Virginia.
Two of its navigable tributaries, the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers, penetrated deep into the heart of Dixie, where much of the Confederacys grain, gunpowder, and iron was produced.
Small wonder that Lincoln reportedly said he  side, but he  In dealing with the Border States, President Lincoln did not rely solely on moral suasion but successfully used methods of dubious legality.
In Maryland he declared martial law where needed and sent in troops, because this state threatened to cut off Washington from the North.
Lincoln also deployed Union soldiers in western Virginia and notably in Missouri, where they fought beside Unionists in a local civil war within the larger Civil War.
Any official statement of the Norths war aims was profoundly influenced by the teetering Border States.
At the very outset, Lincoln was obliged to declare publicly that he was not fighting to free the blacks.
An antislavery declaration would no doubt have driven the Border States into the welcoming arms of the South.
An antislavery war was also extremely unpopular in the so-called Butternut region of southern Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
That area had been settled largely by Southerners who had carried their racial prejudices with them when they crossed the Ohio River (see Makers of America: Settlers of the Old Northwest, pp.
248249).
It was to be a hotbed of pro-Southern sentiment throughout the war.
Sensitive to this delicate political calculus, Lincoln insisted repeatedlyeven though undercutting his moral high groundthat his paramount purpose was to save the Union at all costs.
Thus the war began not as one between slave soil and free soil, but one for the Unionwith slaveholders on both sides and many proslavery sympathizers in the North.
Slavery also colored the character of the war  in the West.
In Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma), most of the Five Civilized Tribesthe Seceding States (with dates and order of secession) Note the long interval nearly six monthsbetween the secession of South Carolina, the first state to go, and that of Tennessee, the last state to leave the Union.
These six months were a time of terrible trial for moderate Southerners.
When a Georgia statesman pleaded for restraint and negotiations with Washington, he was rebuffed with the cry, Throw the bloody spear into this den of incendiaries!
Border slave states that did not secede Seceded after Fort Sumter Seceded before Fort Sumter ARK.
May 6, 1861 MO.
INDIAN TERRITORY TENN.
June 8, 1861 W. VA.
DEL.
TEX.
Feb.
1,1861 LA.
Jan.
26, 1861 ALA.
Jan.
11, 1861 MISS.
Jan.
9, 1861 GA.
Jan 19, 1861 FLA.
Jan.
10, 1861 S.C.
Dec.
20, 1860 N.C.
May 20,1861 VA.
Apr.
17, 1861   If I could save the Union without freeing any slave, I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves, I would do it; and if I could do it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that.
Cherokees, Creeks, Choctaws, Chickasaws, and Seminolessided with the Confederacy.
Some of these Indians, notably the Cherokees, owned slaves and thus felt themselves to be making common cause with the slaveowning South.
To secure their loyalty, the Confederate government agreed to take over federal payments to the tribes and invited the Native Americans to send delegates to the Confederate congress.
In return the tribes supplied troops to the Confederate army.
Meanwhile, a rival faction of Cherokees and most of the Plains Indians sided with the Union, only to be rewarded after the war with a relentless military campaign to herd them onto reservations or into oblivion.
Unhappily, the conflict between Billy Yank and Johnny Reb was a brothers war.
There were many Northern volunteers from the Southern states and many Southern volunteers from the Northern states.
The mountain whites of the South sent north some 50,000 men, and the loyal slave states contributed some 300,000 soldiers to the Union.
In many a family of the Border States, one brother rode north to fight with the Blue, another south to fight with the Gray.
Senator Crittenden of Kentucky, who fathered the abortive Crittenden Compromise, fathered two sons: one became a general in the Union army, the other a general in the Confederate army.
Lincolns own Kentucky-born wife had four brothers who fought for the Confederacy.
When war broke out, the South seemed to have great advantages.
The Confederacy could fight defensively behind interior lines.
The North had to invade the vast territory of the Confederacy, conquer it, and drag it bodily back into the Union.
In fact, the South did not have to win the war in order to win its independence.
If it merely fought the invaders to a draw and stood firm, Confederate independence would be won.
Fighting on their own soil for self-determination and preservation of their way of life, Southerners at first enjoyed an advantage in morale as well.
Militarily, the South from the opening volleys of the war had the most talented officers.
Most conspicuous among a dozen or so first-rate commanders was gray-haired General Robert E. Lee, whose knightly bearing and chivalric sense of honor embodied the Southern ideal.
Lincoln had unofficially offered him command of the Northern armies, but when Virginia seceded, Lee felt honor-bound to go with his native state.
Lees chief lieutenant for much of the war was black-bearded Thomas J.
(Stonewall) Jackson, a gifted tactical theorist and a master of speed and deception.
Besides their brilliant leaders, ordinary Southerners were also bred to fight.
Accustomed to managing horses and bearing arms from boyhood, they made excellent cavalrymen and foot soldiers.
Their high-pitched rebel yell (yeeeahhh) was designed to strike terror into the hearts of fuzz-chinned Yankee recruits.
There is nothing like it on this side of the infernal region, one Northern soldier declared.
The peculiar corkscrew sensation that it sends down your backbone can never be told.
You have to feel it.
As one immense farm, the South seemed to be handicapped by the scarcity of factories.
Yet by seizC HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 ing federal weapons, running Union blockades, and developing their own ironworks, Southerners managed to obtain sufficient weaponry.
Yankee ingenuity was not confined to Yankees.
Nevertheless, as the war dragged on, grave shortages of shoes, uniforms, and blankets disabled the South.
Even with immense stores of food on Southern farms, civilians and soldiers often went hungry because of supply problems.
Forward, men!
They have cheese in their haversacks, cried one Southern officer as he attacked the Yankees.
Much of the hunger was caused by a breakdown of the Souths rickety transportation system, especially where the railroad tracks were cut or destroyed by the Yankee invaders.
The economy was the greatest Southern weakness; it was the Norths greatest strength.
The North was not only a huge farm but a sprawling factory as well.
Yankees boasted about three-fourths of the nations wealth, including three-fourths of the thirty thousand miles of railroads.
The North also controlled the sea.
With its vastly superior navy, it established a blockade that, though a sieve at first, soon choked off Southern supplies and eventually shattered Southern morale.
Its sea power also enabled the North to exchange huge quantities of grain for munitions and supplies from Europe, thus adding the output from the factories of Europe to its own.
The Union also enjoyed a much larger reserve of manpower.
The loyal states had a population of some 22 million; the seceding states had 9 million people, including about 3.5 million slaves.
Adding to the Norths overwhelming supply of soldiery were ever-more immigrants from Europe, who continued to pour into the North even during the war (see table p.
440).
Over 800,000 newcomers arrived between 1861 and 1865, most of them British, Irish, and German.
Large numbers of them were induced to enlist in the Union army.
Altogether about onefifth of the Union forces were foreign-born, and in some units military commands were given in four different languages.
New England 20,671 $ 1, 257,477,783 391,836 $ 1, 468,599,287 24% Middle states 53,387 435,061,964 546,243 802,338,392 42 Western states 36,785 194,212,543 209,909 384,606,530 20 Southern states 20,631 95,975,185 110,721 155,531,281 8 Pacific states 8,777 23,380,334 50,204 71,229,989 3 Territories 282 3,747,906 2,333 3,556,197 1 TOTAL 140,533 $1,009,855,715 1,311,246 $1,885,861,676 Whether immigrant or native, ordinary Northern boys were much less prepared than their Southern counterparts for military life.
Yet the Northern clodhoppers and shopkeepers eventually adjusted themselves to soldiering and became known for their discipline and determination.
The North was much less fortunate in its higher commanders.
Lincoln was forced to use a costly trial-and-error method to sort out effective leaders from the many incompetent political officers, until he finally uncovered a general, Ulysses Simpson Grant, who would crunch his way to victory.
In the long run, as the Northern strengths were brought to bear, they outweighed those of the South.
But when the war began, the chances for Southern independence were unusually favorable certainly better than the prospects for success of the C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 1860 153,640 29,737 48,637 54,491 20,775 1861 91,918 19,675 23,797 31,661 16,785 1862 91,985 24,639 23,351 27,529 16,466 1863 176,282 66,882 55,916 33,162 20,322 1864 193,418 53,428 63,523 57,276 19,191 1865* 248,120 82,465 29,772 83,424 52,459 1866 318,568 94,924 36,690 115,892 71,062 *Only the first three months of 1865 were war months The great body of the aristocracy and the commercial classes are anxious to see the United States go to pieces [but] the middle and lower class sympathise with us [because they] see in the convulsion in America an era in the history of the world, out of which must come in the end a general recognition of the right of mankind to the produce of their labor and the pursuit of happiness.
thirteen colonies in 1776.
The turn of a few events could easily have produced a different outcome.
The might-have-beens are fascinating.
Border States had seceded,  the upper Mississippi Valley had turned against the Union,   demanded an armistice, and  France had broken the blockade, the South might well have won.
All of these possibilities almost became realities, but none of them actually occurred, and lacking their impetus, the South could not hope to win.
Successful revolutions, including the American Revolution of 1776, have generally succeeded because of foreign intervention.
The South counted on it, did not get it, and lost.
Of all the Confederacys potential assets, none counted more weightily than the prospect of foreign intervention.
Europes ruling classes were openly sympathetic to the Confederate cause.
They had long abhorred the incendiary example of the American democratic experiment, and they cherished a kind of fellow-feeling for the Souths semifeudal, aristocratic social order.
In contrast, the masses of workingpeople in Britain, and to some extent in France, were pulling and praying for the North.
Many of them had read though at the outset officially fought only over the question of unionmight extinguish slavery if the North emerged victorious.
The common folk of Britain could not yet cast the ballot, but they could cast the brick.
Their certain hostility to any official intervention on behalf of the South evidently had a sobering effect on the British government.
Thus the dead hands of Uncle Tom helped Uncle Sam by restraining the British and French ironclads from piercing the Union blockade.
Yet the fact remained that British textile mills depended on the American South for 75 percent of their cotton supplies.
Wouldnt silent looms force London to speak?
Humanitarian sympathies aside, Southerners counted on hard economic need to bring Britain to their aid.
Why did King Cotton fail them?
He failed in part because he had been so lavishly productive in the immediate prewar years of 18571860.
Enormous exports of cotton in those years had piled up surpluses in British warehouses.
When the shooting started in 1861, British manufacturers had on hand a hefty oversupply of fiber.
The real pinch did not come until about a year and a half later, when thousands of hungry operatives were thrown out of work.
But by this time Lincoln had announced his slave-emancipation policy, and the wage slaves of Britain were not going to demand a war to defend the slaveowners of the South.
The direst effects of the cotton famine in Britain were relieved in several ways.
Hunger among unemployed workers was partially eased when certain kindhearted Americans sent over several cargoes of foodstuffs.
As Union armies penetrated  the South, they captured or bought considerable  supplies of cotton and shipped them to Britain; the Confederates also ran a limited quantity through the blockade.
In addition, the cotton growers of Egypt and India, responding to high prices, increased their output.
Finally, booming war industries in England, which supplied both the North and the South, relieved unemployment.
King Wheat and King Cornthe monarchs of Northern agricultureproved to be more potent potentates than King Cotton.
During these war years, the North, blessed with ideal weather, produced bountiful crops of grain and harvested them with McCormicks mechanical reaper.
In the same period, the British suffered a series of bad harvests.
They were forced to import huge quantities of grain from America, which happened to have the cheapest and most abundant supply.
If the British had broken the blockade to gain cotton, they would have provoked the North to war and would have lost this precious granary.
Unemployment for some seemed better than hunger for all.
Hence one Yankee journal could exult, Americas diplomatic front has seldom been so critical as during the Civil War.
The South never wholly abandoned its dream of foreign intervention, and Europes rulers schemed to take advantage of Americas distress.
The first major crisis with Britain came over the on the high seas north of Cuba stopped a British mail steamer, the  Confederate diplomats bound for Europe.
Britons were outraged: upstart Yankees could not so boldly offend the Mistress of the Seas.
War preparations buzzed, and red-coated troops embarked for Canada, with bands blaring I Wish I Was in Dixie.
The London Foreign Office prepared an ultimatum demanding surrender of the prisoners and an apology.
But luckily, slow communications gave passions on both sides a chance to cool.
Lincoln came to see the  elephants, and reluctantly released them.
One war at a time, he reportedly said.
Another major crisis in Anglo-American relations arose over the unneutral building in Britain  of Confederate commerce-raiders, notably the the meaning of loopholed British law because they left their shipyards unarmed and picked up their guns elsewhere.
The  the Portuguese Azores, and there took on weapons and a crew from two British ships that followed it.
Although flying the Confederate flag and officered by Confederates, it was manned by Britons and never entered a Confederate port.
Britain was thus the chief naval base of the Confederacy.
The   the Far East with the burning hulks of Yankee merchantmen.
All told, this British pirate captured over sixty vessels.
Competing British shippers were delighted, while an angered North had to divert naval strength from its blockade for wild-goose chases.
The barnacled  challenge from a stronger Union cruiser off the coast of France in 1864 and was quickly destroyed.
The   issue of British-built Confederate raiders stayed afloat.
Under prodding by the American minister, Charles Francis Adams, the British gradually perceived that allowing such ships to be built was a C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 We are as busy, as rich, and as fortunate in our trade as if the American war had never broken out, and our trade with the States had never been disturbed.
Cotton was no King, notwithstanding the prerogatives which had been loudly claimed for him.
dangerous precedent that might someday be used against them.
In 1863 London openly violated its own leaky laws and seized another raider being built for the South.
But despite greater official efforts  by Britain to remain truly neutral, Confederate  commerce-destroyers, chiefly British-built, captured more than 250 Yankee ships, severely crippling the American merchant marine, which never fully recovered.
Glowering Northerners looked farther north and talked openly of securing revenge by grabbing Canada when the war was over.
A final Anglo-American crisis was touched off in 1863 by the Laird ramstwo Confederate warships being constructed in the shipyard of John Laird and Sons in Great Britain.
Designed to destroy the wooden ships of the Union navy with their iron rams and large-caliber guns, they were far more dangerous than the swift but lightly armed would have sunk the blockading squadrons and then brought Northern cities under their fire.
In retaliation the North doubtless would have invaded Canada, and a full-dress war with Britain would have erupted.
But Minister Adams took a hard line, warning that this is war if the rams were released.
At the last minute, the London government relented and bought the two ships for the Royal Navy.
Everyone seemed satisfiedexcept the disappointed Confederates.
Britain also eventually repented its sorry role in the  to submit the  1872 paid American claimants $15.5 million for damages caused by wartime commerce-raiders.
American rancor was also directed at Canada, where despite the vigilance of British authorities, Southern agents plotted to burn Northern cities.
One Confederate raid into Vermont left three banks plundered and one American citizen dead.
Hatred of England burned especially fiercely among IrishAmericans, and they unleashed their fury on Canada.
They raised several tiny armies of a few hundred green-shirted men and launched invasions of Canada, notably in 1866 and 1870.
The Canadians condemned the Washington government for permitting such violations of neutrality, but the administration was hampered by the presence of so many Irish-American voters.
As fate would have it, two great nations emerged from the fiery furnace of the American Civil War.
One was a reunited United States, and the other was a united Canada.
The British Parliament established the Dominion of Canada in 1867.
It was partly designed to bolster the Canadians, both politically and spiritually, against the possible vengeance of the United States.
Emperor Napoleon III of France, taking advantage of Americas preoccupation with its own internal problems, dispatched a French army to occupy Mexico City in 1863.
The following year he installed on the ruins of the crushed republic his puppet, Austrian archduke Maximilian, as emperor of  Mexico.
Both sending the army and enthroning Maximilian were flagrant violations of the Monroe Doctrine.
Napoleon was gambling that the Union would collapse and thus America would be too weak to enforce its hands-off policy in the Western Hemisphere.
The North, as long as it was convulsed by war, pursued a walk-on-eggs policy toward France.
But when the shooting stopped in 1865, Secretary of State Seward, speaking with the authority of nearly a million war-tempered bayonets, prepared to march south.
Napoleon realized that his costly gamble was doomed.
He reluctantly took French leave of his illstarred puppet in 1867, and Maximilian soon crumpled ingloriously before a Mexican firing squad.
The Confederate government, like King Cotton, harbored fatal weaknesses.
Its constitution, borrowing liberally from that of the Union, contained one deadly defect.
Created by secession, it could not logically deny future secession to its constituent states.
Jefferson Davis, while making his bow to states rights, had in view a well-knit central government.
But determined states rights supporters fought him bitterly to the end.
The Richmond regime encountered difficulty even in persuading certain state troops to serve outside their own borders.
The governor of Georgia, a belligerent states righter, at times seemed ready to secede from the secession and fight both sides.
States rights were no less damaging to the Confederacy than Yankee sabers.
Sharp-featured President Davistense, humorless, legalistic, and stubbornwas repeatedly in hot water.
Although an eloquent orator and an able administrator, he at no time enjoyed real personal popularity and was often at loggerheads with his congress.
At times there was serious talk of impeachC HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 ment.
Unlike Lincoln, Davis was somewhat imperious and inclined to defy rather than lead public opinion.
Suffering acutely from neuralgia and other nervous disorders (including a tic), he overworked himself with the details of both civil government and military operations.
No one could doubt his courage, sincerity, integrity, and devotion to the South, but the task proved beyond his powers.
It was probably beyond the powers of any mere mortal.
Lincoln also had his troubles, but on the whole they were less prostrating.
The North enjoyed the prestige of a long-established government, financially stable and fully recognized both at home and abroad.
Lincoln, the inexperienced prairie politician, proved superior to the more experienced but less flexible Davis.
Able to relax with droll stories at critical times, Old Abe grew as the war dragged on.
Tactful, quiet, patient, yet firm, he developed a genius for interpreting and leading a fickle public opinion.
Holding aloft the banner of Union with inspiring utterances, he demonstrated charitableness toward the South and forbearance toward backbiting colleagues.
Did [Secretary of War Edwin] Stanton say I was a damned fool?
he reportedly replied to a talebearer.
Then I dare say I must be one, for Stanton is generally right and he always says what he means.
Honest Abe Lincoln, when inaugurated, laid his hand on the Bible and swore a solemn oath to uphold the Constitution.
Then, driven by sheer necessity, he proceeded to tear a few holes in that hallowed document.
He sagely concluded that if he did not do so, and patch the parchment later, there might not be a Constitution of a  States to mend.
The rail-splitter was no hairsplitter.
But such infractions were not, in general, sweeping.
Congress, as is often true in times of crisis, generally accepted or confirmed the presidents questionable acts.
Lincoln, though accused of being a Simple Susan Tyrant, did not believe that his ironhanded authority would continue once the Union was preserved.
As he pointedly remarked in 1863, a man suffering from temporary illness would not persist in feeding on bitter medicines for the remainder of his healthful life.
Congress was not in session when war erupted, so Lincoln gathered the reins into his own hands.
Brushing aside legal objections, he boldly proclaimed a blockade.
(His action was later upheld by the Supreme Court.
) He arbitrarily increased the size of the Federal armysomething that only Congress can do under the Constitution (see Art.
I, Sec.
VIII, para.
12).
(Congress later approved.
) He directed the secretary of the Treasury to advance $2 million without appropriation or security to three private citizens for military purposesa grave irregularity contrary to the Constitution (see Art.
I, Sec.
IX, para.
He suspended the precious privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, so that anti-Unionists might be summarily arrested.
In taking this step, he defied a dubious ruling by the chief justice that the safeguards of habeas corpus could be set aside only by authorization of Congress (see Art.
I, Sec.
IX, para.
Lincolns regime was guilty of many other highhanded acts.
For example, it arranged for supervised voting in the Border States.
There the intimidated citizen, holding a colored ballot indicating his party preference, had to march between two lines of armed troops.
The federal officials also ordered the suspension of certain newspapers and the arrest of their editors on grounds of obstructing the war.
Jefferson Davis was less able than Lincoln to exercise arbitrary power, mainly because of confirmed states righters who fanned an intense spirit of localism.
To the very end of the conflict, the owners of horse-drawn vans in Petersburg, Virginia, prevented the sensible joining of the incoming and outgoing tracks of a militarily vital railroad.
The South seemed willing to lose the war before it would surrender local rightsand it did.
Ravenous, the gods of war demanded menlots of men.
Northern armies were at first manned solely by volunteers, with each state assigned a quota based on population.
But in 1863, after volunteering had slackened off, Congress passed a federal conscription law for the first time on a nationwide scale in the United States.
The provisions were grossly unfair to the poor.
Rich boys, including young John D. Rockefeller, could hire substitutes to go in their places or purchase exemption outright by paying $300.
Three-hundred-dollar men was the scornful epithet applied to these slackers.
Draftees who did not have the necessary cash complained that their banditlike government demanded three hundred dollars or your life.
The draft was especially damned in the Democratic strongholds of the North, notably in New York City.
A frightful riot broke out in 1863, touched off largely by underprivileged and antiblack IrishAmericans, who shouted, Down with Lincoln!
and Down with the draft!
For several days the city was at the mercy of a burning, drunken, pillaging mob.
Scores of lives were lost, and the victims included many lynched blacks.
Elsewhere in the North, conscription met with resentment and an occasional minor riot.
More than 90 percent of the Union troops were volunteers, since social and patriotic pressures to enlist were strong.
As able-bodied men became scarcer, generous bounties for enlistment were offered by federal, state, and local authorities.
An enterprising and money-wise volunteer might legitimately pocket more than $1,000.
With money flowing so freely, an unsavory crew of bounty brokers and substitute brokers sprang up, at home and abroad.
They combed the poorhouses of the British Isles and western Europe, and many an Irishman or German was befuddled with whiskey and induced to enlist.
A number of the slippery bounty boys deserted, volunteered elsewhere, and netted another handsome haul.
The records reveal that one bounty jumper repeated his profitable operation thirty-two times.
But desertion was by no means confined to bounty jumpers.
The rolls of the Union army recorded about 200,000 deserters of all classes, and the Confederate authorities were plagued with a runaway problem of similar dimensions.
Like the North, the South at first relied mainly on volunteers.
But since the Confederacy was much less populous, it scraped the bottom of its manpower barrel much more quickly.
Quipsters observed that any man who could see lightning and hear thunder July 1861 186,751 112,040 January 1862 575,917 351,418 March 1862 637,126 401,395 January 1863 918,121 446,622 January 1864 860,737 481,180 January 1865 959,460 445,203 C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 was judged fit for service.
The Richmond regime, robbing both cradle and grave (ages seventeen to fifty), was forced to resort to conscription as early as April 1862, nearly a year earlier than the Union.
Confederate draft regulations also worked serious injustices.
As in the North, a rich man could hire a substitute or purchase exemption.
Slaveowners or overseers with twenty slaves might also claim exemption.
These special privileges, later modified, made for bad feelings among the less prosperous, many of whom complained that this was a rich mans war but a poor mans fight.
Why sacrifice ones life to save an affluent neighbors slaves?
No large-scale draft riots broke out in the South, as in New York City.
But the Confederate conscription agents often found it prudent to avoid those areas inhabited by sharpshooting mountain whites, who were branded Tories, traitors, and Yankeelovers.
Blessed with a lions share of the wealth, the North rode through the financial breakers much more smoothly than the South.
Excise taxes on tobacco and alcohol were substantially increased by Congress.
An income tax was levied for the first time in the nations experience, and although the rates were painlessly low by later standards, they netted millions of dollars.
Customs receipts likewise proved to be important revenue-raisers.
Early in 1861, after enough antiprotection Southern members had seceded, Congress passed the Morrill Tariff Act, superseding the low Tariff of 1857.
It increased the existing duties some 5 to 10 percent, boosting them to about the moderate level of the Walker Tariff of 1846.
But these modest rates were soon pushed sharply upward by the necessities of war.
The increases were designed partly to raise additional revenue and partly to provide more protection for the prosperous manufacturers who were being plucked by the new internal taxes.
A protective tariff thus became identified with the Republican party, as American industrialists, mostly Republicans, waxed fat on these welcome benefits.
The Washington Treasury also issued greenbacked paper money, totaling nearly $450 million, at face value.
This printing-press currency was inadequately supported by gold, and hence its value was determined by the nations credit.
Greenbacks thus fluctuated with the fortunes of Union arms and at one low point were worth only 39 cents on the gold dollar.
The holders of the notes, victims of creeping inflation, were indirectly taxed as the value of the currency slowly withered in their hands.
Yet borrowing far outstripped both greenbacks and taxes as a money-raiser.
The federal Treasury netted $2,621,916,786 through the sale of bonds, which bore interest and which were payable at a later date.
The modern technique of selling these issues to the people directly through drives and payroll deductions had not yet been devised.
Accordingly, the Treasury was forced to market its bonds through the private banking house of Jay Cooke and Company, which received a commission of three-eighths of 1 percent on all sales.
With both profits and patriotism at stake, the bankers succeeded in making effective appeals to citizen  purchasers.
A financial landmark of the war was the National Banking System, authorized by Congress in 1863.
Launched partly as a stimulant to the sale of government bonds, it was also designed to establish a standard bank-note currency.
(The country was then flooded with depreciated rag money issued by unreliable bankers.
) Banks that joined the National Banking System could buy government bonds and issue sound paper money backed by them.
The war-born National Banking Act thus turned out to be the first significant step taken toward a unified banking network since 1836, when the monster Bank of the United States was killed by Andrew Jackson.
Spawned by the war, this new A poor woman yesterday applied to a merchant in Carey Street to purchase a barrel of flour.
The price he demanded was $70.
My God!
exclaimed she, how can I pay such prices?
I have seven children; what shall I do?
I dont know, madam, said he coolly, unless you eat your children.
system continued to function for fifty years, until replaced by the Federal Reserve System in 1913.
An impoverished South was beset by different financial woes.
Customs duties were choked off as the coils of the Union blockade tightened.
Large issues of Confederate bonds were sold at home and abroad, amounting to nearly $400 million.
The Richmond regime also increased taxes sharply and imposed a 10 percent levy on farm produce.
But in general the states rights Southerners were immovably opposed to heavy direct taxation by the central authority: only about 1 percent of the total income was raised in this way.
As revenue began to dry up, the Confederate government was forced to print blue-backed paper money with complete abandon.
Runaway inflation occurred as Southern presses continued to grind out the poorly backed treasury notes, totaling in all more than $1 billion.
The Confederate paper dollar finally sank to the point where it was worth only 1.6 cents when Lee surrendered.
Overall, the war inflicted a 9,000 percent inflation rate on the Confederacy, contrasted with 80 percent for the Union.
Wartime prosperity in the North was little short of miraculous.
The marvel is that a divided nation could fight a costly conflict for four long years and then emerge seemingly more prosperous than ever before.
New factories, sheltered by the friendly umbrella of the new protective tariffs, mushroomed forth.
Soaring prices, resulting from inflation, unfortunately pinched the day laborer and the whitecollar worker to some extent.
But the manufacturers and businesspeople raked in the fortunes of war.
The Civil War bred a millionaire class for the first time in American history, though a few individuals of extreme wealth could have been found earlier.
Many of these newly rich were noisy, gaudy, brassy, and given to extravagant living.
Their emergence merely illustrates the truth that some gluttony and greed always mar the devotion and self-sacrifice called forth by war.
The story of speculators and peculators was roughly the same in both camps.
But graft was more flagrant in the North than in the South, partly because there was more to steal.
Yankee sharpness appeared at its worst.
Dishonest agents, putting profits above patriotism, palmed off aged and blind horses on government purchasers.
Unscrupulous Northern manufacturers supplied shoes with cardboard soles and fastdisintegrating uniforms of reprocessed or shoddy wool rather than virgin wool.
Hence the reproachful term shoddy millionaires was doubly fair.
One profiteer reluctantly admitted that his profits were painfully large.
Newly invented laborsaving machinery enabled the North to expand economically, even though the cream of its manpower was being drained off to the fighting front.
The sewing machine wrought wonders in fabricating uniforms and military footwear.
The marriage of military need and innovative machinery largely ended the production of customtailored clothing.
Graduated standard measurements were introduced, creating sizes that were widely used in the civilian garment industry forever after.
Clattering mechanical reapers, which numbered about 250,000 by 1865, proved hardly less potent than thundering guns.
They not only released tens of thousands of farm boys for the army but fed them their field rations.
They produced vast surpluses of C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 grain that, when sent abroad, helped dethrone King Cotton.
They provided profits with which the North was able to buy munitions and supplies from abroad.
They contributed to the feverish prosperity of the Northa prosperity that enabled the Union to weather the war with flying colors.
Other industries were humming.
The discovery of petroleum gushers in 1859 had led to a rush of Fifty-Niners to Pennsylvania.
The result was the birth of a new industry, with its petroleum plutocracy and coal oil Johnnies.
Pioneers continued to push westward during the war, altogether an estimated 300,000 people.
Major magnets were free gold nuggets and free land under the Homestead Act of 1862.
Strong propellants were the federal draft agents.
The only major Northern industry to suffer a crippling setback was the ocean-carrying trade, which fell prey to the  The Civil War was a womens war, too.
The protracted conflict opened new opportunities for women.
When men departed in uniform, women often took their jobs.
In Washington, D.C., five hundred women clerks (government girls) became government workers, with over one hundred in the Treasury Department alone.
The booming military demand for shoes and clothing, combined with technological marvels like the sewing machine, likewise drew countless women into industrial employment.
Before the war, one industrial worker in four had been female; during the war, the ratio rose to one in three.
Other women, on both sides, stepped up to the fighting frontor close behind it.
More than four hundred women accompanied husbands and sweethearts into battle by posing as male soldiers.
Other women took on dangerous spy missions.
One woman was executed for smuggling gold to the Confederacy.
Elizabeth Blackwell, Americas first female physician, helped organize the U.S.
Sanitary Commission to assist the Union armies in the field.
The commission trained nurses, collected medical supplies, and equipped hospitals.
Commission work helped many women to acquire the organizational skills and the self-confidence that would propel the womens movement forward after the war.
Heroically energetic Clara Barton and dedicated Dorothea Dix, superintendent of nurses for the Union army, helped transform nursing from a lowly service into a respected professionand in the process opened up another major sphere of employment for women in the postwar era.
Equally renowned in the South was Sally Tompkins, who ran a Richmond infirmary for wounded Confederate soldiers and was awarded the rank of captain by Confederate president Jefferson Davis.
Still other women, North as well as South, organized bazaars and fairs that raised millions of dollars for the relief of widows, orphans, and disabled soldiers.
The South fought to the point of exhaustion.
The suffocation caused by the blockade, together with the destruction wrought by invaders, took a terrible toll.
Possessing 30 percent of the national wealth in 1860, the South claimed only 12 percent in 1870.
Before the war the average per capita income of Southerners (including slaves) was about two-thirds that of Northerners.
The Civil War squeezed the average southern income to two-fifths of the Northern level, where it remained for the rest of the century.
The Souths bid for independence exacted a cruel and devastating cost.
Transportation collapsed.
The South was even driven to the economic cannibalism of pulling up rails from the less-used lines to repair the main ones.
Window weights were melted down into bullets; gourds replaced dishes; pins became so scarce that they were loaned with reluctance.
To the brutal end, the South mustered remarkable resourcefulness and spirit.
Women buoyed up their menfolk, many of whom had seen enough of war at first hand to be heartily sick of it.
A proposal was made by a number of women that they cut off their long hair and sell it abroad.
But the project was not adopted, partly because of the blockade.
The self-sacrificing women took pride in denying themselves the silks and satins of their Northern sisters.
The chorus of a song, The Southern Girl, touched a cheerful note: At wars end the Northern Captains of Industry had conquered the Southern Lords of the Manor.
A crippled South left the capitalistic North free  to work its own way, with high tariffs and other  benefits.
The manufacturing moguls of the North, ushering in the full-fledged Industrial Revolution, were destined for increased dominance over American economic and political life.
Hitherto the  agrarian slavocracy of the South had partially checked the ambitions of the rising plutocracy of the North.
Now cotton capitalism had lost out to industrial capitalism.
The South of 1865 was to be rich in little but amputees, war heroes, ruins,  and memories.
C HAPTER 20 Girding for War: The North and the South, 18611865 Confederate government formed Lincoln takes office (March 4) Fort Sumter fired upon (April 12) Four Upper South states secede (AprilJune) Morrill Tariff Act passed Lincoln suspends writ of habeas corpus Confederacy enacts conscription Homestead Act Union enacts conscription New York City draft riots National Banking System established Napoleon III installs Archduke Maximilian as emperor of Mexico For further reading, see page A14 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Furnace of Civil War  18611865 A BRAHAM L INCOLN , 1862 W hen President Lincoln issued his call to the states for seventy-five thousand militiamen on April 15, 1861, he envisioned them serving for only ninety days.
Reaffirming his limited war aims, he declared that he had no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with slavery in the States where it exists.
With a swift flourish of federal force, he hoped to show the folly of secession and rapidly return the rebellious states to the Union.
But the war was to be neither brief nor limited.
When the guns fell silent four years later, hundreds of thousands of soldiers on both sides lay dead, slavery was ended forever, and the nation faced the challenge  of reintegrating the defeated but still recalcitrant South into the Union.
Northern newspapers, at first sharing Lincolns expectation of a quick victory, raised the cry, On to Richmond!
In this yeasty atmosphere, a Union army of some thirty thousand men drilled near Washington in the summer of 1861.
It was ill prepared for battle, but the press and the public clamored for action.
Lincoln eventually concluded that an attack on a smaller Confederate force at Bull Run (Manassas Junction), some thirty miles southwest of Washington, might be worth a try.
If successful, it would demonstrate the superiority of Union arms.
It might even lead to the capture of the Confederate capital at Richmond, one hundred miles to the south.
If Richmond fell, secession would be thoroughly discredited, and the Union could be restored without damage to the economic and social system of the South.
Raw Yankee recruits swaggered out of Washington toward Bull Run on July 21, 1861, as if they were headed for a sporting event.
Congressmen and spectators trailed along with their lunch baskets to witness the fun.
At first the battle went well for the Yankees.
But Stonewall Jacksons gray-clad warriors stood like a stone wall (here he won his nickname), and Confederate reinforcements arrived unexpectedly.
Panic seized the green Union troops, many of whom fled in shameful confusion.
The Confederates, themselves too exhausted or disorganized to pursue, feasted on captured lunches.
The military picnic at Bull Run, though not decisive militarily, bore significant psychological and political consequences, many of them paradoxical.
Victory was worse than defeat for the South, because it inflated an already dangerous overconfidence.
Many of the Southern soldiers promptly deserted, some boastfully to display their trophies, others feeling that the war was now surely over.
Southern enlistments fell off sharply, and preparations for a protracted conflict slackened.
Defeat was better than victory for the Union, because it dispelled all illusions of a one-punch war and caused the Northerners to buckle down to the staggering task at hand.
It also set the stage for a war that would be waged not merely for the cause of Union but also, eventually, for the abolitionist ideal of emancipation.
Northern hopes brightened later in 1861, when General George B. McClellan was given command of the Army of the Potomac, as the major Union C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 force near Washington was now called.
Red-haired and red-mustached, strong and stocky, McClellan was a brilliant, thirty-four-year-old West Pointer.
As a serious student of warfare who was dubbed Young Napoleon, he had seen plenty of fighting, first in the Mexican War and then as an observer of the Crimean War in Russia.
Cocky George McClellan embodied a curious mixture of virtues and defects.
He was a superb organizer and drillmaster, and he injected splendid morale into the Army of the Potomac.
Hating to sacrifice his troops, he was idolized by his men, who affectionately called him Little Mac.
But he was a perfectionist who seems not to have realized that an army is never ready to the last button and that wars cannot be won without running some risks.
He consistently but erroneously believed that the enemy outnumbered him, partly because his intelligence reports from the head of Pinkertons Detective Agency were unreliable.
He was overcautiousLincoln once accused him of having the slowsand he addressed the president in an arrogant tone that a less forgiving person would never have tolerated.
Privately the general referred to his chief as a baboon.
As McClellan doggedly continued to drill his army without moving it toward Richmond, the derisive Northern watchword became All Quiet Along the Potomac.
The song of the hour was Tardy George (McClellan).
After threatening to borrow the army if it was not going to be used, Lincoln finally issued firm orders to advance.
A reluctant McClellan at last decided upon a waterborne approach to Richmond, which lies at We called to them, tried to tell them there was no danger, called them to stop, implored them to stand.
We called them cowards, denounced them in the most offensive terms, put out our heavy revolvers, and threatened to shoot them, but all in vain; a cruel, crazy, mad, hopeless panic possessed them, and communicated to everybody about in front and rear.
The heat was awful, although now about six; the men were exhaustedtheir mouths gaped, their lips cracked and blackened with powder of the cartridges they had bitten off in battle, their eyes staring in frenzy; no mortal ever saw such a mass of ghastly wretches.
the western base of a narrow peninsula formed by the James and York Rivershence the name given to this historic encounter: the Peninsula Campaign.
McClellan warily inched toward the Confederate capital in the spring of 1862 with about 100,000 men.
After taking a month to capture historic Yorktown, which bristled with imitation wooden cannon, he finally came within sight of the spires of Richmond.
At this crucial juncture, Lincoln diverted McClellans anticipated reinforcements to chase Stonewall Jackson, whose lightning feints in the Shenandoah Valley seemed to put Washington, D.C., in jeopardy.
Stalled in front of Richmond, McClellan was further frustrated when Jeb Stuarts Confederate cavalry rode completely around his army  on reconnaissance.
Then General Robert E. Lee C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 I have just read your dispatch about soretongued and fatigued horses.
Will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of Antietam that fatigues anything?
McClellan's route Yorktown Richmond Williamsburg Washington Baltimore V I R G I N I A M A R Y L A N D P E N N S Y L V A N I A DEL.
N.J.
W. VA.
Peninsula Campaign, 1862 launched a devastating counterattackthe Seven Days BattlesJune 26July 2, 1862.
The Confederates slowly drove McClellan back to the sea.
The Union forces abandoned the Peninsula Campaign as a costly failure, and Lincoln temporarily abandoned McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomacthough Lees army had suffered some twenty thousand casualties to McClellans ten  thousand.
Lee had achieved a brilliant, if bloody, triumph.
Yet the ironies of his accomplishment are striking.
If McClellan had succeeded in taking Richmond and ending the war in mid-1862, the Union would probably have been restored with minimal disruption  to the peculiar institution.
Slavery would have  survived, at least for a time.
By his successful defense of Richmond and defeat of McClellan, Lee had in effect ensured that the war would endure until slavery was uprooted and the Old South thoroughly destroyed.
Lincoln himself, who had earlier professed his unwillingness to tamper with slavery where it already existed, now declared that the rebels cannot experiment for ten years trying to destroy the government and if they fail still come back into the Union unhurt.
He began to draft an emancipation proclamation.
Union strategy now turned toward total war.
As finally developed, the Northern military plan had six components: first, slowly suffocate the South by blockading its coasts; second, liberate the slaves and hence undermine the very economic foundations of the Old South; third, cut the Confederacy in half by seizing control of the Mississippi River backbone; fourth, chop the Confederacy to pieces by Main Thrusts, 18611865 Northern strategists at first believed that the rebellion could be snuffed out quickly by a swift, crushing blow.
But the stiffness of Southern resistance to the Unions early probes, and the Norths inability to strike with sufficient speed and severity, revealed that the conflict would be a war of attrition, long  and bloody.
Chattanooga Boundary of Confederacy Union advances Confederate advances Union naval blockade FLA.
ALA.
ARK.
S.C.
N.C.
ILL.
IND.
OHIO PA.
DEL.
TENN.
MISS.
N.J.
Vicksburg Port Hudson Savannah Raleigh Appomattox C.H.
Cairo Antietam Charleston (Fort Sumter) Atlanta Gettysburg Mobile New Orleans W. VA.
The sights and smells that assailed us were simply indescribable .
corpses swollen to twice their original size, some of them actually burst asunder with the pressure of foul gasses.
The odors were so nauseating and so deadly that in a short time we all sickened and were lying with our mouths close to the ground, most of us vomiting profusely.
sending troops through Georgia and the Carolinas; fifth, decapitate it by capturing its capital at Richmond; and sixth (this was Ulysses Grants idea especially), try everywhere to engage the enemys main strength and to grind it into submission.
The blockade started leakily: it was not clamped down all at once but was extended by degrees.
A watertight patrol of some thirty-five hundred miles of coast was impossible for the hastily improvised Northern navy, which counted converted yachts and ferryboats in its fleet.
But blockading was simplified by concentrating on the principal ports and inlets where dock facilities were available for loading bulky bales of cotton.
How was the blockade regarded by the naval powers of the world?
Ordinarily, they probably would have defied it, for it was never completely effective and was especially sievelike at the outset.
But Britain, the greatest maritime nation, recognized it as binding and warned its shippers that they ignored it at their peril.
An explanation is easy.
Blockade happened to be the chief offensive weapon of Britain, which was still Mistress of the Seas.
Britain plainly did not want to tie its hands in  a future war by insisting that Lincoln maintain impossibly high blockading standards.
Blockade-running soon became riskily profitable, as the growing scarcity of Southern goods drove prices skyward.
The most successful blockade runners were swift, gray-painted steamers, scores of which were specially built in Scotland.
A leading rendezvous was the West Indies port of Nassau, in the British Bahamas, where at one time thirty-five of the speedy ships rode at anchor.
The low-lying craft would take on cargoes of arms brought in by tramp steamers from Britain, leave with fraudulent papers for Halifax (Canada), and then return a few days later with a cargo of cotton.
The risks were great, but the profits would mount to 700 percent and more for lucky gamblers.
Two successful voyages might well pay for capture on a third.
The lush days of blockade-running finally passed as Union squadrons gradually pinched off the leading Southern ports, from New Orleans to Charleston.
The Northern navy enforced the blockade with high-handed practices.
Yankee captains, for example, would seize British freighters on the high seas, if laden with war supplies for the tiny port of Nassau and other halfway stations.
The justification was that obviously these shipments were ultimately destined, by devious routes, for the Confederacy.
London, although not happy, acquiesced in this disagreeable doctrine of ultimate destination or continuous voyage.
British blockaders might need to take advantage of the same far-fetched interpretation in a future waras in fact they did in the world war of 19141918.
The most alarming Confederate threat to the blockade came in 1862.
Resourceful Southerners raised and reconditioned a former wooden U.S.
warship, the  iron railroad rails.
Renamed the  but powerful monster easily destroyed two wooden ships of the Union navy in the Virginia waters of Chesapeake Bay; it also threatened catastrophe to the entire Yankee blockading fleet.
(Actually the homemade ironclad was not a seaworthy craft.
) A tiny Union ironclad, the  about one hundred days, arrived on the scene in the nick of time.
For four hours, on March 9, 1862,  the little Yankee cheesebox on a raft fought the C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 Merrimack  The most frightened man on that gloomy day .
was the Secretary of War [Stanton].
He was at times almost frantic.
The he said, would destroy every vessel in the service, could lay every city on the coast under contribution, could take Fortress Monroe.
Likely the first movement of the  would be to come up the Potomac and disperse Congress, destroy the Capitol and public buildings.
wheezy   France had already built several powerful ironclads, but the first battle-testing of these new craft heralded the doom of wooden warships.
A few months after the historic battle, the Confederates destroyed the  ing Union troops.
Robert E. Lee, having broken the back of McClellans assault on Richmond, next moved northward.
At the Second Battle of Bull Run (August 2930, 1862), he encountered a Federal force under General John Pope.
A handsome, dashing, soldierly figure, Pope boasted that in the western theater of war, from which he had recently come, he had seen only the backs of the enemy.
Lee quickly gave him a front view, furiously attacking Popes troops and inflicting a crushing defeat.
Emboldened by this success, Lee daringly thrust into Maryland.
He hoped to strike a blow that would not only encourage foreign intervention but also seduce the still-wavering Border State and its sisters from the Union.
The Confederate troops sang lustily: But the Marylanders did not respond to the siren song.
The presence among the invaders of so many blanketless, hatless, and shoeless soldiers dampened the states ardor.
Events finally converged toward a critical battle at Antietam Creek, Maryland.
Lincoln, yielding to popular pressure, hastily restored Little Mac to active command of the main Northern army.
His soldiers tossed their caps skyward and hugged his horse as they hailed his return.
Fortune shone upon McClellan when two Union soldiers found a copy of Lees battle plans wrapped around a packet of three cigars dropped by a careless Confederate officer.
With this crucial piece of intelligence in hand, McClellan succeeded in halting Lee at Antietam on September 17, 1862, in one of the bitterest and bloodiest days of the war.
Antietam was more or less a draw militarily.
But Lee, finding his thrust parried, retired across the Potomac.
McClellan, from whom much more had been hoped, was removed from his field command for the second and final time.
His numerous critics, condemning him for not having boldly pursued the ever-dangerous Lee, finally got his scalp.
The landmark Battle of Antietam was one of the decisive engagements of world historyprobably the most decisive of the Civil War.
Jefferson Davis was perhaps never again so near victory as on  that fateful summer day.
The British and French governments were on the verge of diplomatic mediation, a form of interference sure to be angrily resented by the North.
An almost certain rebuff by Washington might well have spurred Paris and London into armed collusion with Richmond.
But both capitals cooled off when the Union displayed unexpected power at Antietam, and their chill deepened with the passing months.
Bloody Antietam was also the long-awaited victory that Lincoln needed for launching his Emancipation Proclamation.
The abolitionists had long been clamoring for action: Wendell Phillips was denouncing the president as a first-rate second-rate man.
By midsummer of 1862, with the Border States safely in the fold, Lincoln was ready to move.
But he believed that to issue such an edict on the heels of a series of military disasters would be folly.
It would seem like a confession that the North, unable to conquer the South, was forced to call upon the slaves to murder their masters.
Lincoln therefore decided to wait for the outcome of Lees invasion.
Antietam served as the needed emancipation springboard.
The halting of Lees offensive was just enough of a victory to justify Lincolns issuing, on September 23, 1862, the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation.
This hope-giving document announced that on January 1, 1863, the president would issue a final proclamation.
On the scheduled date, he fully redeemed his promise, and the Civil War became more of a moral crusade as the fate of slavery and the South it had sustained was sealed.
The war now became more of what Lincoln called a remorseless revolutionary struggle.
After January 1, 1863, Lincoln said, The character of the war will be changed.
It will be one of subjugation.
The [old] South is to be destroyed and replaced by new propositions and ideas.
Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 declared forever free the slaves in those Confederate states still in rebellion.
Bondsmen in the loyal Border States were not affected, nor were those in specific conquered areas in the Southall told, about 800,000.
The tone of the document was dull and legalistic (one historian has said that it had all the moral grandeur of a bill of lading).
But if Lincoln stopped short of a clarion call for a holy war to achieve freedom, he pointedly concluded his historic document by declaring that the Proclamation C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 was an act of justice, and calling for the considerate judgment of mankind and the gracious favor of Almighty God.
The presidential pen did not formally strike the shackles from a single slave.
Where Lincoln could presumably free the slavesthat is, in the loyal Border Stateshe refused to do so, lest he spur disunion.
Where he could notthat is, in the Confederate stateshe tried to.
In short, where he not.
Thus the Emancipation Proclamation was stronger on proclamation than emancipation.
Yet much unofficial do-it-yourself liberation did take place.
Thousands of jubilant slaves, learning of the proclamation, flocked to the invading Union armies, stripping already rundown plantations of their work force.
In this sense the Emancipation Proclamation was heralded by the drumbeat of running feet.
But many fugitives would have come anyhow, as they had from the wars outset.
Lincolns immediate goal was not only to liberate the slaves but also to strengthen the moral cause of the Union at home and abroad.
This he succeeded in doing.
At the same time, Lincolns proclamation clearly foreshadowed the ultimate doom of slavery.
This was legally achieved by action of the individual states and by their ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment in 1865, eight months after the Civil War had ended.
(For text, see the Appendix.
) The Emancipation Proclamation also fundamentally changed the nature of the war because it effectively removed any chance of a negotiated settlement.
Both sides now knew that the war would be a fight to the finish.
Public reactions to the long-awaited proclamation of 1863 were varied.
God bless Abraham Lincoln, exulted the antislavery editor Horace Greeley in his  ists complained that Lincoln had not gone far enough.
On the other hand, formidable numbers of Northerners, especially in the Butternut regions of the Old Northwest and the Border States, felt that he By Thirteenth Amendment, 1865 By state action, 18631865 By Emancipation Proclamation (in theory), 1863; legalized by Thirteenth Amendment ARK.
TENN.
W. VA.
DEL.
TEXAS LA.
ALA.
MISS.
FLA.
S.C.
N.C.
Emancipation in the South President Lincoln believed that emancipation of the slaves, accompanied by compensation to their owners, would be fairest to the South.
He formally proposed such an amendment to the Constitution in December 1862.
What finally emerged was the Thirteenth Amendment of 1865, which freed all slaves  compensation.
Spectator  The Government liberates the enemys slaves as it would the enemys cattle, simply to weaken them in the coming conflict.
The principle asserted is not that a human being cannot justly own another, but that he cannot own him unless he is loyal to the United States.
had gone too far.
A cynical Democratic rhymester quipped, Opposition mounted in the North against supporting an abolition war; ex-president Pierce and others felt that emancipation should not be inflicted on the slaves.
Many Boys in Blue, especially from the Border States, had volunteered to fight for the Union, not against slavery.
Desertions increased sharply.
The crucial congressional elections in the autumn of 1862 went heavily against the administration, particularly in New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio.
Democrats even carried Lincolns Illinois, although they did not secure control of Congress.
The Emancipation Proclamation caused an outcry to rise from the South that Lincoln the fiend was trying to stir up the hellish passions of a slave insurrection.
Aristocrats of Europe, noting that the proclamation applied only to rebel slaveholders, were inclined to sympathize with Southern protests.
But the Old World working classes, especially in Britain, reacted otherwise.
They sensed that the proclamation spelled the ultimate doom of slavery, and many laborers were more determined than ever to oppose intervention.
Gradually the diplomatic position of the Union improved.
The North now had much the stronger moral cause.
In addition to preserving the Union, it  had committed itself to freeing the slaves.
The  moral position of the South was correspondingly  diminished.
As Lincoln moved to emancipate the slaves, he also took steps to enlist blacks in the armed forces.
Although some African-Americans had served in the Revolution and the War of 1812, the regular army contained no blacks at the wars outset, and the War Department refused to accept those free Northern blacks who tried to volunteer.
(The Union navy, however, enrolled many blacks, mainly as cooks, stewards, and firemen.
) But as manpower ran low and emancipation was proclaimed, black enlistees were accepted, sometimes over ferocious protests from Northern as well as Southern whites.
By wars end some 180,000 C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 You say you will not fight to free negroes.
Some of them seem willing to fight for you; but, no matter.
Fight you, then, exclusively to save the Union.
I issued the proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the Union.
blacks served in the Union armies, most of them from the slave states, but many from the free-soil North.
Blacks accounted for about 10 percent of the total enlistments in the Union forces on land and sea and included two Massachusetts regiments raised largely through the efforts of the ex-slave Frederick Douglass.
Black fighting men unquestionably had their hearts in the war against slavery that the Civil War had become after Lincoln proclaimed emancipation.
Participating in about five hundred engagements, they received twenty-two Congressional Medals of Honorthe highest military award.
Their casualties were extremely heavy; more than thirtyeight thousand died, whether from battle, sickness, or reprisals from vengeful masters.
Many, when captured, were put to death as slaves in revolt, for not until 1864 did the South recognize them as prisoners of war.
In one notorious case, several black soldiers were massacred after they had formally surrendered at Fort Pillow, Tennessee.
Thereafter vengeful black units cried Remember Fort Pillow as they swung into battle and vowed to take no prisoners.
For reasons of pride, prejudice, and principle, the Confederacy could not bring itself to enlist slaves until a month before the war ended, and then it was too late.
Meanwhile, tens of thousands were forced into labor battalions, the building of fortifications, the supplying of armies, and other warconnected activities.
Slaves moreover were the stomach of the Confederacy, for they kept the farms going while the white men fought.
Ironically, the great mass of Southern slaves did little to help their Northern liberators, white or black.
A thousand scattered torches in the hands of All the negroes found in blue uniform or with any outward marks of a Union soldier upon him was killedI saw some taken into the woods and hungOthers I saw stripped of all their clothing and they stood upon the bank of the river with their faces riverwards and then they were shotStill others were killed by having their brains beaten out by the butt end of the muskets in the hands of the Rebels.
a thousand slaves would have brought the Southern soldiers home, and the war would have ended.
Through the grapevine, the blacks learned of Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation.
The bulk of them, whether because of fear, loyalty, lack of leadership, or strict policing, did not cast off their chains.
But tens of thousands revolted with their feet when they abandoned their plantations upon the approach or arrival of Union armies, with or without emancipation proclamations.
About twentyfive thousand joined Shermans march through Georgia in 1864, and their presence in such numbers  created problems of supply and discipline.
After Antietam, Lincoln replaced McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac with General  A. E. Burnside, whose ornate side-whiskers came to be known as burnsides or sideburns.
Protesting his unfitness for this responsibility, Burnside proved it when he launched a rash frontal attack on Lees strong position at Fredericksburg, Virginia, on December 13, 1862.
A chicken could not have lived in the line of fire, remarked one Confederate officer.
More than ten thousand Northern soldiers were killed or wounded in Burnsides Slaughter Pen.
A new slaughter pen was prepared when General Burnside yielded his command to Fighting Joe Hooker, an aggressive officer but a headstrong subordinate.
At Chancellorsville, Virginia, May 24, 1863, Lee daringly divided his numerically inferior force and sent Stonewall Jackson to attack the Union flank.
The strategy worked.
Hooker, temporarily dazed by a near hit from a cannonball, was badly beaten but not crushed.
This victory was probably Lees most brilliant, but it was dearly bought.
Jackson was mistakenly shot by his own men in the gathering dusk and died a few days later.
I have lost my right arm, lamented Lee.
Southern folklore relates how Jackson outflanked the angels while galloping into heaven.
Lee now prepared to follow up his stunning victory by invading the North again, this time through Pennsylvania.
A decisive blow would add strength to the noisy peace prodders in the North and would also encourage foreign interventionstill a Southern hope.
Three days before the battle was joined, Union general George G. Meadescholarly, unspectacular, abruptwas aroused from his sleep at 2  A .
with the unwelcome news that he would replace Hooker.
Quite by accident, Meade took his stand atop a low ridge flanking a shallow valley near quiet little C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 The Road to Gettysburg, December 1862July 1863 V I R G I N I A M A R Y L A N D P E N N S Y L V A N I A Washington (July 1-3, 1863) (May 2-4, 1863) (Dec.
13, 1862) W .
V A .
works doubly, weakening the enemy and strengthening us.
It is difficult to say they are not as good soldiers as any.
Abandon all the posts now garrisoned by black men, take 150,000 [black] men from our side and put them in the battlefield or cornfield against us, and we would be compelled to abandon the war in three weeks.
Political speeches are unfortunately all too often composed of claptrap, platitudes, and just plain bunkand they are frequently written by someone other than the person delivering them.
But Abraham Lincolns address at the dedication of the cemetery at Gettysburg battlefield on November 19, 1863, has long been recognized as a masterpiece of political oratory and as a foundational document of the American political system, as weighty a statement of the national purpose as the Declaration of Independence (which it deliberately echoes in its statement that all men are created equal) or even the Constitution itself.
In just two hundred seventy-two simple but eloquent words that Lincoln himself indisputably wrote, he summarized the case for American nationhood.
What are his principal arguments?
What values did he invoke?
What did he think was at stake in the Civil War?
(Conspicuously, he makes no direct mention of slavery in this address.
) Another speech that Lincoln gave in 1861 offers some clues.
He said, I have often inquired of myself what great principle or idea it was that kept this [nation] together.
It was not the mere separation of the colonies from the motherland, but that sentiment in the Declaration of Independence which gave liberty not alone to the people of this country, but hope to the world, for all future time.
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
There his 92,000 men in blue locked in furious combat with Lees 76,000 gray-clad warriors.
The battle seesawed across the rolling green slopes for three agonizing days, July 13, 1863, and the outcome was in doubt until the very end.
The failure of General George Picketts magnificent but futile charge finally broke the back of the Confederate attackand broke the heart of the Confederate cause.
Picketts charge has been called the high tide of the Confederacy.
It defined both the northernmost point reached by any significant Southern force and the last real chance for the Confederates to win the war.
As the Battle of Gettysburg raged, a Confederate peace delegation was moving under a flag of truce toward the Union lines near Norfolk, Virginia.
Jefferson Davis hoped his negotiators would arrive in Washington from the south just as Lees triumphant army marched on it from Gettysburg to the north.
But the victory at Gettysburg belonged to Lincoln, who refused to allow the Confederate peace mission to pass through Union lines.
From now on, the Southern cause was doomed.
Yet the men of Dixie fought on for nearly two years longer, through sweat, blood, and weariness of spirit.
Later in that dreary autumn of 1863, with the graves still fresh, Lincoln journeyed to Gettysburg  to dedicate the cemetery.
He read a two-minute address, following a two-hour speech by the orator of the day.
Lincolns noble remarks were branded by the London  editors as dishwatery and silly.
The address attracted relatively little attention at the time, but the president was speaking for the ages.
Events in the western theater of the war at last provided Lincoln with an able general who did not have to be shelved after every reverse.
Ulysses S. Grant had been a mediocre student at West Point, distinguishing himself only in horsemanship, although he did fairly well at mathematics.
After fighting creditably in the Mexican War, he was stationed at isolated frontier posts, where boredom and loneliness drove him to drink.
Resigning from the army to avoid a court-martial for drunkenness, he failed at various business ventures, and when war came, he was working in his fathers leather store in Illinois for $50 a month.
Grant did not cut much of a figure.
The shy and silent shopkeeper was short, stooped, awkward, stubble-bearded, and sloppy in dress.
He managed with some difficulty to secure a colonelcy in the volunteers.
From then on, his military experience combined with his boldness, resourcefulness, and tenacitycatapulted him on a meteoric rise.
Grants first signal success came in the northern Tennessee theater.
After heavy fighting, he captured Fort Henry and Fort Donelson on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers in February 1862.
When the Confederate commander at Fort Donelson asked for terms, Grant bluntly demanded an unconditional and immediate surrender.
Grants triumph in Tennessee was crucial.
It not only riveted Kentucky more securely to the Union C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 The Battle of Gettysburg, 1863 With the failure of Picketts charge, the fate of the Confederacy was sealedthough the Civil War dragged on for almost two more bloody years.
Union  positions Confederate  positions Confederate  advances H er r R id ge Culp's Hill M cP he rs o n R id g e Oak       Hill Cemetery Hill Big Round Top Little  Round Top Ce meter y Rid g e S e m in a ry R id g e but also opened the gateway to the strategically important region of Tennessee, as well as to Georgia and the heart of Dixie.
Grant next attempted to exploit his victory by capturing the junction of the main Confederate north-south and east-west railroads in the Mississippi Valley at Corinth, Mississippi.
But a Confederate force foiled his plans in a gory battle at Shiloh, just over the Tennessee border from Corinth, on April 67, 1862.
Though Grant successfully counterattacked, the impressive Confederate showing at Shiloh confirmed that there would be no quick end to the war in the West.
Lincoln resisted all demands for the removal of Unconditional Surrender Grant, insisting, I cant spare this man; he fights.
When talebearers later told Lincoln that Grant drank too much, the president allegedly replied, Find me the brand, and Ill send a barrel to each of my other generals.
There is no evidence that Grants drinking habits seriously impaired his military performance.
Other Union thrusts in the West were in the making.
In the spring of 1862, a flotilla commanded by David G. Farragut joined with a Northern army to strike the South a blow by seizing New Orleans.
With Union gunboats both ascending and descending the Mississippi, the eastern part of the Confederacy was left with a jeopardized back door.
Through this narrowing entrance, between Vicksburg, Mississippi, and Port Hudson, Louisiana, flowed herds of vitally needed cattle and other provisions from Louisiana and Texas.
The fortress of Vicksburg, located on a hairpin turn of the Mississippi, was the Souths sentinel protecting the lifeline to the western sources of supply.
General Grant was now given command of the Union forces attacking Vicksburg and in the teeth of grave difficulties displayed rare skill and daring.
The siege of Vicksburg was his best-fought campaign of the war.
The beleaguered city at length surrendered, on July 4, 1863, with the garrison reduced to eating mules and rats.
Five days later came the fall of Port Hudson, the last Southern bastion on the Mississippi.
The spinal cord of the Confederacy was now severed, and, in Lincolns quaint phrase, the Father of Waters at last flowed unvexed to the sea.
The Union victory at Vicksburg (July 4, 1863) came the day after the Confederate defeat at Gettysburg.
The political significance of these back-to-back military successes was monumental.
Reopening the Mississippi helped to quell the Northern peace agitation in the Butternut area of the Ohio River valley.
Confederate control of the Mississippi had cut off that regions usual trade routes down the Ohio-Mississippi River system to New Orleans, thus adding economic pain to that border sections already shaky support for the abolition war.
The twin victories also conclusively tipped the diplomatic scales in favor of the North, as Britain stopped delivery of the Laird rams to the Confederates and as France killed a deal for the sale of six naval vessels to the Richmond government.
By the end of 1863, all Confederate hopes for foreign help were irretrievably lost.
General Grant, the victor of Vicksburg, was now transferred to the east Tennessee theater, where Confederates had driven Union forces from the battlefield at Chickamauga into the city of Chattanooga, to which they then laid siege.
Grant won a series of desperate engagements in November 1863 in the vicinity of besieged Chattanooga, including Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain (the Battle Above the Clouds).
Chattanooga was liberated, the state was cleared of Confederates, and the way was thus opened for an invasion of Georgia.
Grant was rewarded by being made general in chief.
Georgias conquest was entrusted to General William Tecumseh Sherman.
Red-haired and redbearded, grim-faced and ruthless, he captured Atlanta in September 1864 and burned the city in November of that year.
He then daringly left his supply base, lived off the country for some 250 miles, and weeks later emerged at Savannah on the sea.
A rousing Northern song (Marching Through Georgia) put it, C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 The Mississippi River and Tennessee, 18621863 Grant, 1862-1863 Grant, 1863 Farragut, 1862-1863 MO.
ILL.
TENN.
ARK.
MISS.
ALA.
FLA.
Vicksburg         (July 4, 1863) Mobile New Orleans Montgomery Chattanooga Memphis Corinth (April, 1862) Port  Hudson Fort Donelson   (Feb., 1862) Fort Henry Cairo If you of the East, who have found this war against the South, and for the negro, gratifying to your hate or profitable to your purse, will continue it .
[be prepared for]  eternal divorce between the West and the East.
The erection of the states watered by the Mississippi and its tributaries into an independent Republic is the talk of every other western man.
But Shermans hated Blue Bellies, sixty thousand strong, cut a sixty-mile swath of destruction through Georgia.
They burned buildings, leaving only the blackened chimneys (Shermans Sentinels).
They tore up railroad rails, heated them red-hot, and twisted them into iron doughnuts and Shermans hairpins.
They bayoneted family portraits and ran off with valuable souvenirs.
War .
is all hell, admitted Sherman later, and he proved it by his efforts to make Georgia howl.
One of his major purposes was to destroy supplies destined for the Confederate army and to weaken the morale of the men at the front by waging war on their homes.
Sherman was a pioneer practitioner of total war.
His success in Shermanizing the South was attested by increasing numbers of Confederate desertions.
Although his methods were brutal, he probably shortened the struggle and hence saved lives.
But there can be no doubt that the discipline of his army at times broke down, as roving riffraff (Shermans bummers) engaged in an orgy of  pillaging.
Sherman the Brute was universally damned in the South.
After seizing Savannah as a Christmas present for Lincoln, Shermans army veered north into South Carolina, where the destruction was even more vicious.
Many Union soldiers believed that this state, the hell-hole of secession, had wantonly provoked the war.
The capital city, Columbia, burst GEORGIA SOUTH CAROLINA NORTH CAROLINA TENNESSEE ALA.
KENTUCKY (Sherman reached  here on Dec.
22, 1864) Charleston Raleigh (Feb.
17, 1865) Chattanooga (Occupied by Sherman Sept.
2, 1864;  burned Nov.
16, 1864) Shermans March, 18641865 into flames, in all probability the handiwork of the Yankee invader.
Crunching northward, Shermans conquering army had rolled deep into North Carolina by the time the war ended.
Presidential elections come by the calendar and not by the crisis.
As fate would have it, the election of 1864 fell most inopportunely in the midst of war.
Political infighting in the North added greatly to Lincolns cup of woe.
Factions within his own party, distrusting his ability or doubting his commitment to abolition, sought to tie his hands or even remove him from office.
Conspicuous among his critics was a group led by the overambitious secretary of the Treasury, Salmon Chase.
Especially burdensome to Lincoln was the creation of the Congressional Committee on the Conduct of the War, formed in late 1861.
It was dominated by radical Republicans who resented the expansion of presidential power in wartime and who pressed Lincoln zealously on emancipation.
Most dangerous of all to the Union cause were the Northern Democrats.
Deprived of the talent that had departed with the Southern wing of the party, those Democrats remaining in the North were left with the taint of association with the seceders.
Tragedy befell the Democratsand the Union when their gifted leader, Stephen A. Douglas, died of typhoid fever seven weeks after the war began.
Unshakably devoted to the Union, he probably could have kept much of his following on the path of loyalty.
Lacking a leader, the Democrats divided.
A large group of War Democrats patriotically supported the Lincoln administration, but tens of thousands of Peace Democrats did not.
At the extreme were the so-called Copperheads, named for the poisonous snake, which strikes without a warning rattle.
Copperheads openly obstructed the war through attacks against the draft, against Lincoln, and especially, after 1863, against emancipation.
They denounced the president as the Illinois Ape and condemned the Nigger War.
They commanded considerable political strength in the southern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois.
Notorious among the Copperheads was a sometime congressman from Ohio, Clement L. Vallandigham.
This tempestuous character possessed brilliant oratorical gifts and unusual talents for stirring up trouble.
A Southern partisan, he publicly demanded an end to the wicked and cruel war.
The civil courts in Ohio were open, and he should C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 it was dam fulishness trying to lick shurmin.
He had been getting nuthin but hell & lots uv it ever since he saw the dam yanks, and he was tirde uv it.
He would head for home now, but his old horse was plaid out.
If the dam yankees had not got there yet, it would be a dam wunder.
They were thicker than lise on a hen and a dam site ornerier.
have been tried in them for sedition.
But he was convicted by a military tribunal in 1863 for treasonable utterances and was then sentenced to prison.
Lincoln decided that if Vallandigham liked the Confederates so much, he ought to be banished to their lines.
This was done.
Vallandigham was not so easily silenced.
Working his way to Canada, he ran for the governorship of Ohio on foreign soil and polled a substantial but insufficient vote.
He returned to his own state before the war ended, and although he defied King Lincoln and spat upon a military decree, he was not further prosecuted.
The strange case of Vallandigham inspired Edward Everett Hale to write his moving but fictional story of Philip Nolan,  popular in the North and which helped stimulate devotion to the Union.
Nolan was a young army officer found guilty of participation in the Aaron Burr plot of 1806 (see p.
223).
He had cried out in court, Damn the United States!
I wish I may never hear of the United States again!
For this outburst he was condemned to a life of eternal exile on American warships.
As the election of 1864 approached, Lincolns precarious authority depended on his retaining Republican support while spiking the threat from the Peace Democrats and Copperheads.
Fearing defeat, the Republican party executed  a clever maneuver.
Joining with the War Democrats, it proclaimed itself to be the Union party.
Thus  the Republican party passed temporarily out of  existence.
Lincolns renomination at first encountered  surprisingly strong opposition.
Hostile factions whipped up considerable agitation to shelve homely Old Abe in favor of his handsome nemesis, Secretary of the Treasury Chase.
Lincoln was accused of lacking force, of being overready to compromise, of not having won the war, and of having shocked many sensitive souls by his ill-timed and earthy jokes.
(Prince of Jesters, one journal called him.
) But the ditch Lincoln move collapsed, and he was nominated by the Union party without serious  dissent.
Lincolns running mate was ex-tailor Andrew Johnson, a loyal War Democrat from Tennessee who had been a small slaveowner when the conflict began.
He was placed on the Union party ticket to sew up the election by attracting War Democrats and the voters in the Border States, and, sadly, with no proper regard for the possibility that Lincoln might die in office.
Southerners and Copperheads alike condemned both candidates as birds of a feather: two ignorant, third-rate, boorish, backwoods politicians born in log cabins.
Embattled Democratsregular and Copperheadnominated the deposed and overcautious war hero, General McClellan.
The Copperheads managed to force into the Democratic platform a plank denouncing the prosecution of the war as a failure.
But McClellan, who could not otherwise have faced his old comrades-in-arms, repudiated this defeatist declaration.
The campaign was noisy and nasty.
The Democrats cried, Old Abe removed McClellan.
Well now remove Old Abe.
They also sang, Mac Will Win the Union Back.
The Union party supporters shouted for Uncle Abe and Andy and urged, Vote as you shot.
Their most effective slogan, growing out of a remark by Lincoln, was Dont swap horses in the middle of the river.
Lincolns reelection was at first gravely in doubt.
The war was going badly, and Lincoln himself gave way to despondency, fearing that political defeat was imminent.
The anti-Lincoln Republicans, taking heart, started a new movement to dump Lincoln in favor of someone else.
But the atmosphere of gloom was changed electrically, as balloting day neared, by a succession of Northern victories.
Admiral Farragut captured Union Party, 1864 The blue area represents the Union party.
NORTHERN DEMOCRATS REPUBLICANS COPPERHEADS PEACE DEMOCRATS WAR DEMOCRATS Mobile, Alabama, after defiantly shouting the now famous order, Damn the torpedoes!
Go ahead.
General Sherman seized Atlanta.
General (Little Phil) Sheridan laid waste the verdant Shenandoah Valley of Virginia so thoroughly that in his words a crow could not fly over it without carrying his rations with him.
The president pulled through, but nothing more than necessary was left to chance.
At election time many Northern soldiers were furloughed home to support Lincoln at the polls.
One Pennsylvania veteran voted forty-nine timesonce for himself and once  for each absent member of his company.
Other Northern soldiers were permitted to cast their ballots at the front.
Lincoln, bolstered by the bayonet vote, vanquished McClellan by 212 electoral votes to 21, losing only Kentucky, Delaware, and New Jersey.
But Little Mac ran a closer race than the electoral count indicates.
He netted a healthy 45 percent of C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 Presidential Election of 1864 (showing popular vote by county) Lincoln also carried California,  Oregon, and Nevada, but there was a considerable McClellan vote in each.
Note McClellans strength in the Border States and in the southern tier of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinoisthe so-called Butternut region.
LincolnUnion McClellanDemocratic Not voting, unsettled, etc.
the popular vote, 1,803,787 to Lincolns 2,206,938, piling up much support in the Southerner-infiltrated states of the Old Northwest, in New York, and also  in his native state of Pennsylvania (see map on  p.
470).
One of the most crushing losses suffered by the South was the defeat of the Northern Democrats in 1864.
The removal of Lincoln was the last ghost of a hope for a Confederate victory, and the Southern soldiers would wishfully shout, Hurrah for McClellan!
When Lincoln triumphed, desertions from the sinking Southern ship increased sharply.
After Gettysburg, Grant was brought in from the West over Meade, who was blamed for failing to pursue the defeated but always dangerous Lee.
Lincoln needed a general who, employing the superior resources of the North, would have the intestinal stamina to drive ever forward, regardless of casualties.
A soldier of bulldog tenacity, Grant was the man for this meat-grinder type of warfare.
His overall basic strategy was to assail the enemys armies simultaneously, so that they could not assist one another and hence could be destroyed piecemeal.
His personal motto was When in doubt, fight.
Lincoln urged him to chew and choke, as much as  possible.
A grimly determined Grant, with more than 100,000 men, struck toward Richmond.
He engaged Lee in a series of furious battles in the Wilderness of Virginia, during May and June of 1864, notably in the leaden hurricane of the Bloody Angle and Hells Half Acre.
In this Wilderness Campaign, Grant suffered about fifty thousand casualties, or nearly as many men as Lee commanded at the start.
But Lee lost about as heavily in proportion.
In a ghastly gamble, on June 3, 1864, Grant ordered a frontal assault on the impregnable position of Cold Harbor.
The Union soldiers advanced to almost certain death with papers pinned on their backs bearing their names and addresses.
In a few minutes, about seven thousand men were killed or wounded.
Public opinion in the North was appalled by this blood and guts type of fighting.
Critics cried that Grant the Butcher had gone insane.
But his basic strategy of hammering ahead seemed brutally necessary; he could trade two men for one and still beat the enemy to its knees.
I propose to fight it out on this line, he wrote, if it takes all summer.
It did and it also took all autumn, all winter, and a part of the spring.
In February 1865 the Confederates, tasting the bitter dregs of defeat, tried desperately to negotiate Confederate advances Confederate retreats Grant's advances North Anna Amelia Courthouse Appomattox Courthouse Richmond V I R G I N I A M A R Y L A N D Grants Virginia Campaign, 18641865 The Wilderness Campaign pitted soldier against desperate soldier in some of the most brutal and terrifying fighting of the Civil War.
No one could see the fight fifty feet from him, a Union private recalled of his month spent fighting in Virginia.
The lines were very near each other, and from the dense underbrush and the tops of trees came puffs of smoke, the ping of the bullets and the yell of the enemy.
It was a blind and bloody hunt to the death, in bewildering thickets, rather than a battle.
for peace between the two countries.
Lincoln himself met with Confederate representatives aboard a Union ship moored at Hampton Roads, Virginia, to discuss peace terms.
But Lincoln could accept nothing short of Union and emancipation, and the Southerners could accept nothing short of independence.
So the tribulation wore onamid smoke and agonyto its terrible climax.
The end came with dramatic suddenness.
Rapidly advancing Northern troops captured Richmond and cornered Lee at Appomattox Courthouse in Virginia, in April 1865.
Grantstubble-bearded and informally dressedmet with Lee on the ninth, Palm Sunday, and granted generous terms of surrender.
Among other concessions, the hungry Confederates were allowed to keep their own horses for spring plowing.
Tattered Southern veteransLees Ragamuffins wept as they took leave of their beloved commander.
The elated Union soldiers cheered, but they were silenced by Grants stern admonition, The war is over; the rebels are our countrymen again.
Lincoln traveled to conquered Richmond and sat in Jefferson Daviss evacuated office just forty hours after the Confederate president had left it.
Thank God I have lived to see this, he said.
With  a small escort of sailors, he walked the blasted streets of the city.
Freed slaves began to recognize him, and crowds gathered to see and touch Father Abraham.
One black man fell to his knees before the Emancipator, who said to him, Dont kneel to me.
This is not right.
You must kneel to God only, and thank Him for the liberty you will enjoy hereafter.
Sadly, as many freed slaves were to discover, the hereafter of their full liberty was a long time coming.
On the night of April 14, 1865 (Good Friday), only five days after Lees surrender, Fords Theater in Washington witnessed its most sensational drama.
C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 A half-crazed, fanatically pro-Southern actor, John Wilkes Booth, slipped behind Lincoln as he sat in his box and shot him in the head.
After lying unconscious all night, the Great Emancipator died the following morning.
Now he belongs to the ages, remarked the once-critical Secretary Stanton probably the finest words he ever spoke.
Lincoln expired in the arms of victory, at the very pinnacle of his fame.
From the standpoint of his reputation, his death could not have been better timed if he had hired the assassin.
A large number of his countrymen had not suspected his greatness, and many others had even doubted his ability.
But his dramatic death helped to erase the memory of his shortcomings and caused his nobler qualities to stand out in clearer relief.
The full impact of Lincolns death was not at once apparent to the South.
Hundreds of bedraggled ex-Confederate soldiers cheered, as did some Southern civilians and Northern Copperheads, when they learned of the assassination.
This reaction was only natural, because Lincoln had kept the war grinding on to the bitter end.
If he had only been willing to stop the shooting, the South would have won.
As time wore on, increasing numbers of Southerners perceived that Lincolns death was a calamity for them.
Belatedly they recognized that his kindliness and moderation would have been the most effective shields between them and vindictive treatment by the victors.
The assassination unfortunately increased the bitterness in the North, partly because of the fantastic rumor that Jefferson Davis had plotted it.
A few historians have argued that Andrew  Johnson, now president-by-bullet, was crucified in  Lincolns stead.
The implication is that if the railsplitter had lived, he would have suffered Johnsons fate of being impeached by the embittered members Abraham Lincoln was as little of a tyrant as any man who ever lived.
He could have been a tyrant had he pleased, but he never uttered so much as an ill-natured speech.
In all America there was, perhaps, not one man who less deserved to be the victim of the revolution than he who has just fallen.
of his own party who demanded harshness, not forbearance, toward the South.
The crucifixion thesis does not stand up under scrutiny.
Lincoln no doubt would have clashed with Congress; in fact, he had already found himself in some hot water.
The legislative branch normally struggles to win back the power that has been wrested from it by the executive in time of crisis.
But the surefooted and experienced Lincoln could hardly have blundered into the same quicksands that engulfed Johnson.
Lincoln was a victorious president, and there is no arguing with victory.
In addition to his powers of leadership refined in the war crucible, Lincoln possessed in full measure tact, sweet reasonableness, and an uncommon amount of common sense.
Andrew Johnson, hot-tempered and impetuous, lacked all of these priceless qualities.
Fords Theater, with its tragic murder of  Lincoln, set the stage for the wrenching ordeal of Reconstruction.
The Civil War took a grisly toll in gore, about as much as all of Americas subsequent wars combined.
Over 600,000 men died in action or of disease, and in all over a million were killed or seriously C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 wounded.
To its lasting hurt, the nation lost the cream of its young manhood and potential leadership.
In addition, tens of thousands of babies went unborn because potential fathers were at the front.
Direct monetary costs of the conflict totaled about $15 billion.
But this colossal figure does not include continuing expenses, such as pensions and interest on the national debt.
The intangible costs dislocations, disunities, wasted energies, lowered ethics, blasted lives, bitter memories, and burning hatescannot be calculated.
The greatest constitutional decision of the century, in a sense, was written in blood and handed down at Appomattox Courthouse, near which Lee surrendered.
The extreme states righters were crushed.
The national government, tested in the fiery furnace of war, emerged unbroken.
Nullification and secession, those twin nightmares of previous decades, were laid to rest.
Beyond doubt the Civil Warthe nightmare of the Republicwas the supreme test of American democracy.
It finally answered the question, in the words of Lincoln at Gettysburg, whether a nation dedicated to such principles can long endure.
The preservation of democratic ideals, though not an officially announced war aim, was subconsciously one of the major objectives of the North.
Victory for Union arms also provided inspiration to the champions of democracy and liberalism the world over.
The great English Reform Bill of 1867, under which Britain became a true political democracy, was passed two years after the Civil War ended.
American democracy had proved itself, and its success was an additional argument used by the disfranchised British masses in securing similar blessings for themselves.
The Lost Cause of the South was lost, but few Americans today would argue that the result was not for the best.
The shameful cancer of slavery was sliced away by the sword, and African-Americans were at last in a position to claim their rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
The nation was again united politically, though for many generations still divided spiritually by the passions of the war.
Grave dangers were averted by a Union victory, including the indefinite prolongation of the peculiar institution, the unleashing of the slave power on weak Caribbean neighbors, and the transformation of the area from Panama to Hudson Bay into an armed camp, with several heavily armed and hostile states constantly snarling and sniping at one another.
America still had a long way to go to make the promises of freedom a reality for all its citizens, black and white.
But emancipation laid the necessary groundwork, and a united and democratic United States was free to fulfill its destiny as the dominant republic of the hemisphereand eventually of the world.
First Battle of Bull Run Grant takes Fort Henry and Fort Donelson Battle of Shiloh McClellans Peninsula Campaign Seven Days Battles Second Battle of Bull Run Naval battle of the  Battle of Antietam Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation Battle of Fredericksburg Northern army seizes New Orleans Final Emancipation Proclamation Battle of Chancellorsville Battle of Gettysburg Fall of Vicksburg Fall of Port Hudson Shermans march through Georgia Grants Wilderness Campaign Battle of Cold Harbor Lincoln defeats McClellan for presidency Hampton Roads Conference Lee surrenders to Grant at Appomattox Lincoln assassinated Thirteenth Amendment ratified C HAPTER 21 The Furnace of Civil War, 18611865 ith the end of the Civil War in 1865, the United States was permanently altered, despite the reunification of the Union and the Confederacy.
Slavery was officially banned, secession was a dead issue, and industrial growth surged forward.
For the first time, the United States could securely consider itself as a singular nation rather than a union of states.
Though sectional differences remained, there would be no return to the unstable days of precarious balancing between Northern and Southern interests.
With the Unions victory, power rested firmly with the North, and it would orchestrate the future development of the country.
According to historian Eric Foner, the war redrew the economic and political map of the country.
The constitutional impact of the terms of the Union victory created some of the most farreaching transformations.
The first twelve amendments to the Constitution, ratified before the war, had all served to limit government power.
In contrast, the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery, and the revolutionary Fourteenth Amendment, which conferred citizenship and guaranteed civil rights to all those born in the United States, marked unprecedented expansions of federal power.
Historian James McPherson has noted still other ways in which the Civil War extended the authority of the central government.
It expanded federal powers of taxation.
It encouraged the government to develop the National Banking System, print currency, and conscript an army.
It made the federal courts more influential.
And through the Freedmens Bureau, which aided former slaves in the South, it instituted the first federal social welfare agency.
With each of these actions, the nation moved toward a more powerful federal government, invested with the authority to protect civil rights, aid its citizens, and enforce laws in an aggressive manner that superseded state powers.
Some scholars have disputed whether the Civil War marked an absolute watershed in American history.
They correctly note that racial inequality scandalously persisted after the Civil War, despite the abolition of slavery and the supposed protections extended by federal civil rights legislation.
Others have argued that the industrial growth of the postCivil War era had its real roots in the Jacksonian era, and thus cannot be ascribed solely to war.
Thomas Cochran has even argued that the Civil War may have retarded overall industrialization rather than advancing it.
Regional differences between North and South endured, moreover, even down to the present day.
Yet the argument that the Civil War launched  a modern America remains convincing.
The lives  of Americans, white and black, North and South, were transformed by the war experience.
Industry entered a period of unprecedented growth, having been stoked by the transportation and military needs of the Union army.
The emergence of new, national legal and governmental institutions marked the birth of the modern American state.
All considered, it is hard to deny that the end of the Civil War brought one chapter of the nations history to a close, while opening another.
For further reading, see page A14 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Ordeal of Reconstruction  18651877 A BRAHAM L INCOLN , S ECOND I NAUGURAL , M ARCH 4, 1865 T he battle was done, the buglers silent.
Boneweary and bloodied, the American people, North and South, now faced the staggering challenges of peace.
Four questions loomed large.
How would the South, physically devastated by war and socially revolutionized by emancipation, be rebuilt?
How would the liberated blacks fare as free men and women?
How would the Southern states be reintegrated into the Union?
And who would direct the process of Reconstructionthe Southern states themselves, the president, or Congress?
Other questions also clamored for answers.
What should be done with the captured Confederate ringleaders, all of whom were liable to charges of treason?
During the war a popular Northern song had been Hang Jeff Davis to a Sour Apple Tree, and even innocent children had lisped it.
Davis was temporarily clapped into irons during the early days of his two-year imprisonment.
But he and his fellow conspirators were finally released, partly because the odds were that no Virginia jury would convict them.
All rebel leaders were finally pardoned by President Johnson as sort of a Christmas present in 1868.
But Congress did not remove all remaining civil disabilities until thirty years later and only posthumously restored Daviss citizenship more than a century later.
Dismal indeed was the picture presented by the war-racked South when the rattle of musketry faded.
Not only had an age perished, but a civilization had collapsed, in both its economic and its social structure.
The moonlight-and-magnolia Old South, largely imaginary in any case, had forever gone with the wind.
Handsome cities of yesteryear, such as Charleston and Richmond, were rubble-strewn and weed-choked.
An Atlantan returned to his once-fair hometown and remarked, Hell has laid her egg, and right here it hatched.
Economic life had creaked to a halt.
Banks and business houses had locked their doors, ruined by runaway inflation.
Factories were smokeless, silent, dismantled.
The transportation system had broken down completely.
Before the war five different railroad lines had converged on Columbia, South Carolina; now the nearest connected track was twentynine miles away.
Efforts to untwist the rails corkscrewed by Shermans soldiers proved bumpily unsatisfactory.
Agriculturethe economic lifeblood of the Southwas almost hopelessly crippled.
Once-white cotton fields now yielded a lush harvest of nothing but green weeds.
The slave-labor system had collapsed, seed was scarce, and livestock had been driven off by plundering Yankees.
Pathetic instances were reported of men hitching themselves to plows, while women and children gripped the handles.
Not until 1870 did the seceded states produce as large a cotton crop as that of the fateful year 1860, and much of that yield came from new acreage in the Southwest.
The princely planter aristocrats were humbled by the warat least temporarily.
Reduced to proud poverty, they faced charred and gutted mansions, lost investments, and almost worthless land.
Their investments of more than $2 billion in slaves, their primary form of wealth, had evaporated with emancipation.
Beaten but unbent, many high-spirited white Southerners remained dangerously defiant.
They C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 cursed the damnyankees and spoke of your government in Washington, instead of our government.
One Southern bishop refused to pray for President Andrew Johnson, though Johnson proved to be in sore need of divine guidance.
Conscious of no crime, these former Confederates continued to believe that their view of secession was correct and that the lost cause was still a just war.
One popular anti-Union song ran, Such attitudes boded ill for the prospects of painlessly binding up the Republics wounds.
Confusion abounded in the still-smoldering South about the precise meaning of freedom for blacks.
Emancipation took effect haltingly and unevenly in different parts of the conquered Confederacy.
As Union armies marched in and out of various localities, many blacks found themselves emancipated and then re-enslaved.
A North Carolina slave estimated that he had celebrated freedom about twelve times.
Blacks from one Texas county fleeing to the free soil of the liberated county next door were attacked by slaveowners as they swam across the river that marked the county line.
The next day, trees along the riverbank were bent with swinging corpsesa grisly warning to others dreaming of liberty.
Other planters resisted emancipation more legalistically, stubbornly protesting that slavery was lawful until state legislatures or the Supreme Court declared otherwise.
For many slaves the shackles of bondage were not struck off in a single mighty blow; long-suffering blacks often had to wrench free of their chains link by link.
The variety of responses to emancipation, by whites as well as blacks, illustrated the sometimes startling complexity of the master-slave relationship.
Loyalty to the plantation master prompted some slaves to resist the liberating Union armies, while other slaves pent-up bitterness burst forth violently on the day of liberation.
Many newly emancipated slaves, for example, joined Union troops in pillaging their masters possessions.
In one instance a group of Virginia slaves laid twenty lashes on the back of their former mastera painful dose of his own favorite medicine.
Prodded by the bayonets of Yankee armies of occupation, all masters were eventually forced to recognize their slaves permanent freedom.
The once-commanding planter would assemble his former human chattels in front of the porch of the big house and announce their liberty.
Though some blacks initially responded to news of their emancipation with suspicion and uncertainty, they soon celebrated their newfound freedom.
Many took new names in place of the ones given by their masters and demanded that whites formally address them as Mr.
or Mrs.
Others abandoned the coarse cottons that had been their only clothing as slaves and sought silks, satins, and other finery.
Though many whites perceived such behavior as insubordinate, they were forced to recognize the realities of emancipation.
Never before had I a word of impudence from any of our black folk, wrote one white Southerner, but they are not ours any longer.
Tens of thousands of emancipated blacks took to the roads, some to test their freedom, others to search for long-lost spouses, parents, and children.
Emancipation thus strengthened the black family, and many newly freed men and women formalized slave marriages for personal and pragmatic reasons, including the desire to make their children legal heirs.
Other blacks left their former masters to work in towns and cities, where existing black communities provided protection and mutual assistance.
Whole communities sometimes moved together in search of opportunity.
From 1878 to 1880, some twenty-five thousand blacks from Louisiana, Texas, and Mississippi surged in a mass exodus to Kansas.
The westward flood of these Exodusters was stemmed only when steamboat captains refused to transport more black migrants across the Mississippi River.
The church became the focus of black community life in the years following emancipation.
As slaves, blacks had worshiped alongside whites, but now they formed their own churches pastored by their own ministers.
The black churches grew robustly.
The 150,000-member black Baptist Church of 1850 reached 500,000 by 1870, while the African Methodist Episcopal Church quadrupled in size from 100,000 to 400,000 in the first decade after emancipation.
These churches formed the bedrock of black community life, and they soon gave rise to other benevolent, fraternal, and mutual aid societies.
All these organizations helped blacks protect their newly won freedom.
Emancipation also meant education for many blacks.
Learning to read and write had been a privilege generally denied to them under slavery.
Freedmen wasted no time establishing societies for self-improvement, which undertook to raise funds to purchase land, build schoolhouses, and hire teachers.
One member of a North Carolina education society asserted that a schoolhouse would be the first proof of their  blacks soon found, however, that the demand outstripped the supply of qualified black teachers.
They accepted the aid of Northern white women sent by the American Missionary Association, who volunteered their services as teachers.
They also turned to the federal government for help.
The freed blacks were going to need all the friendsand the power they could muster in Washington.
Abolitionists had long preached that slavery was a degrading institution.
Now the emancipators were faced with the brutal reality that the freedmen were overwhelmingly unskilled, unlettered, without property or money, and with scant knowledge of how to survive as free people.
To cope with this problem throughout the conquered South, Congress created the Freedmens Bureau on March 3, 1865.
On paper at least, the bureau was intended to be a kind of primitive welfare agency.
It was to provide food, clothing, medical care, and education both to freedmen and to white refugees.
Heading C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 I felt like a bird out of a cage.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen.
I could hardly ask to feel any better than I did that day.
The week passed off in a blaze of glory.
Men are taking their wives and children, families which had been for a long time broken up are united and oh!
such happiness.
I am glad I am here.
the bureau was a warmly sympathetic friend of the blacks, Union general Oliver O. Howard, who later founded and served as president of Howard University in Washington, D.C.
The bureau achieved its greatest successes in education.
It taught an estimated 200,000 blacks how to read.
Many former slaves had a passion for learning, partly because they wanted to close the gap between themselves and the whites and partly because they longed to read the Word of God.
In one elementary class in North Carolina sat four generations of the same family, ranging from a six-year-old child to a seventy-five-year-old grandmother.
But in other areas, the bureaus accomplishments were meageror even mischievous.
Although the bureau was authorized to settle former slaves on forty-acre tracts confiscated from the Confederates, little land actually made it into blacks hands.
Instead local administrators often collaborated with planters in expelling blacks from towns and cajoling them into signing labor contracts to work for their former masters.
Still, the white South resented the bureau as a meddlesome federal interloper that threatened to upset white racial dominance.
President Andrew Johnson, who shared the white-supremacist views of most white Southerners, repeatedly tried to kill it, and it expired in 1872.
Few presidents have ever been faced with a more perplexing sea of troubles than that confronting Andrew Johnson.
What manner of man was this medium-built, dark-eyed, black-haired Tennessean, now chief executive by virtue of the bullet that killed Lincoln?
No citizen, not even Lincoln, has ever reached the White House from humbler beginnings.
Born to impoverished parents in North Carolina and early orphaned, Johnson never attended school but was apprenticed to a tailor at age ten.
Ambitious to get ahead, he taught himself to read, and later his wife taught him to write and do simple arithmetic.
Like many another self-made man, he was inclined to overpraise his maker.
Johnson early became active in politics in Tennessee, where he had moved when seventeen years old.
He shone as an impassioned champion of the poor whites against the planter aristocrats, although he himself ultimately owned a few slaves.
He excelled as a two-fisted stump speaker before angry and heckling crowds, who on occasion greeted his political oratory with cocked pistols, not just cocked ears.
Elected to Congress, he attracted much favorable attention in the North (but not the South) when he refused to secede with his own state.
After Tennessee was partially redeemed by Union armies, I thought I  money at my command, what could I do but give  them, and give them my life if necessary.
he was appointed war governor and served courageously in an atmosphere of danger.
Political exigency next thrust Johnson into the vice presidency.
Lincolns Union party in 1864 needed to attract support from the War Democrats and other pro-Southern elements, and Johnson, a Democrat, seemed to be the ideal man.
Unfortunately, he appeared at the vice-presidential inaugural ceremonies the following March in a scandalous condition.
He had recently been afflicted with typhoid fever, and although not known as a heavy drinker, he was urged by his friends to take a stiff bracer of whiskey.
This he didwith unfortunate results.
Old Andy Johnson was no doubt a man of partsunpolished parts.
He was intelligent, able, forceful, and gifted with homespun honesty.
Steadfastly devoted to duty and to the people, he was a dogmatic champion of states rights and the Constitution.
He would often present a copy of the document to visitors, and he was buried with one as a pillow.
C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 Yet the man who had raised himself from the tailors bench to the presidents chair was a misfit.
A Southerner who did not understand the North, a Tennessean who had earned the distrust of the South, a Democrat who had never been accepted by the Republicans, a president who had never been elected to the office, he was not at home in a Republican White House.
Hotheaded, contentious, and stubborn, he was the wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time.
A Reconstruction policy devised by angels might well have failed in his tactless hands.
Even before the shooting war had ended, the political war over Reconstruction had begun.
Abraham Lincoln believed that the Southern states had never legally withdrawn from the Union.
Their formal restoration to the Union would therefore be relatively simple.
Accordingly, Lincoln in 1863 proclaimed his 10 percent Reconstruction plan.
It decreed that a state could be reintegrated into the Union when 10 percent of its voters in the presidential election of 1860 had taken an oath of allegiance to the United States and pledged to abide by emancipation.
The next step would be formal erection of a state government.
Lincoln would then recognize the purified regime.
Lincolns proclamation provoked a sharp reaction in Congress, where Republicans feared the restoration of the planter aristocracy to power and the possible re-enslavement of the blacks.
Republicans therefore rammed through Congress in 1864 the Wade-Davis Bill.
It required that 50 percent of a states voters take the oath of allegiance and demanded stronger safeguards for emancipation than Lincolns as the price of readmission.
Lincoln pocket-vetoed this bill by refusing to sign it after Congress had adjourned.
Republicans were outraged.
They refused to seat delegates from Louisiana after that state had reorganized its government in accordance with Lincolns 10 percent plan in 1864.
The controversy surrounding the Wade-Davis Bill had revealed deep differences between the president and Congress.
Unlike Lincoln, many in Congress insisted that the seceders had indeed left the Union had committed suicide as republican statesand had therefore forfeited all their rights.
They could be readmitted only as conquered provinces on such conditions as Congress should decree.
This episode further revealed differences among Republicans.
Two factions were emerging.
The majority moderate group tended to agree with Lincoln that the seceded states should be restored to the Union as simply and swiftly as reasonable though on Congresss terms, not the presidents.
The minority radical group believed that the South should atone more painfully for its sins.
Before the South should be restored, the radicals wanted its social structure uprooted, the haughty planters punished, and the newly emancipated blacks protected by federal power.
Some of the radicals were secretly pleased when the assassins bullet felled Lincoln, for the martyred president had shown tenderness toward the South.
Spiteful Andy Johnson, who shared their hatred for the planter aristocrats, would presumably also share their desire to reconstruct the South with a rod of iron.
Johnson soon disillusioned them.
He agreed with Lincoln that the seceded states had never legally been outside the Union.
Thus he quickly  recognized several of Lincolns 10 percent governments, and on May 29, 1865, he issued his  own Reconstruction proclamation.
It disfranchised  It is not promulgating anything that I have not heretofore said to say that traitors must be made odious, that treason must be made odious, that traitors must be punished and impoverished.
They must not only be punished, but their social power must be destroyed.
If not, they will still maintain an ascendancy, and may again become numerous and powerful; for, in the words of a former Senator of the United States, When traitors become numerous enough, treason becomes respectable.
certain leading Confederates, including those with taxable property worth more than $20,000, though they might petition him for personal pardons.
It called for special state conventions, which were required to repeal the ordinances of secession, repudiate all Confederate debts, and ratify the slavefreeing Thirteenth Amendment.
States that complied with these conditions, Johnson declared, would be swiftly readmitted to the Union.
Johnson, savoring his dominance over the hightoned aristocrats who now begged his favor, granted pardons in abundance.
Bolstered by the political resurrection of the planter elite, the recently rebellious states moved rapidly in the second half of 1865 to organize governments.
But as the pattern of the new governments became clear, Republicans of all stripes grew furious.
Among the first acts of the new Southern regimes sanctioned by Johnson was the passage of the irontoothed Black Codes.
These laws were designed to regulate the affairs of the emancipated blacks, much as the slave statutes had done in preCivil War days.
Mississippi passed the first such law in November 1865, and other Southern states soon followed suit.
The Black Codes varied in severity from state to state (Mississippis was the harshest and Georgias the most lenient), but they had much in common.
The Black Codes aimed, first of all, to ensure a stable and subservient labor force.
The crushed Cotton Kingdom could not rise from its weeds until the fields were once again put under hoe and plowand many whites wanted to make sure that they retained the tight control they had exercised over black field hands and plow drivers in the days of slavery.
Dire penalties were therefore imposed by the codes on blacks who jumped their labor contracts, which usually committed them to work for the same employer for one year, and generally at pittance wages.
Violators could be made to forfeit back wages or could be forcibly dragged back to work by a paid Negro-catcher.
In Mississippi the captured freedmen could be fined and then hired out to pay their finesan arrangement that closely resembled slavery itself.
The codes also sought to restore as nearly as possible the pre-emancipation system of race relations.
Freedom was legally recognized, as were some other privileges, such as the right to marry.
But all the codes forbade a black to serve on a jury; some even barred blacks from renting or leasing land.
A black could be punished for idleness by being sentenced to work on a chain gang.
Nowhere were blacks allowed to vote.
These oppressive laws mocked the ideal of freedom, so recently purchased by buckets of blood.
The Black Codes imposed terrible burdens on the unfettered blacks, struggling against mistreatment and poverty to make their way as free people.
The worst features of the Black Codes would eventually be repealed, but their revocation could not by itself lift the liberated blacks into economic independence.
Lacking capital, and with little to offer but their labor, thousands of impoverished former slaves slipped into the status of sharecropper farmers, as did many landless whites.
Luckless sharecroppers gradually sank into a morass of virtual peonage and remained there for generations.
Formerly slaves to masters, countless blacks as well as poorer whites in effect became slaves to the soil and to their creditors.
Yet the dethroned planter aristocracy resented even this pitiful concession to freedom.
Sharecropping was the wrong policy, said one planter.
It makes the laborer too independent; he becomes a partner, and has a right to be consulted.
C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 The blacks eat, sleep, move, live, only by the tolerance of the whites, who hate them.
The blacks own absolutely nothing but their bodies; their former masters own everything, and will sell them nothing.
If a black man draws even a bucket of water from a well, he must first get the permission of a white man, his enemy.
If  he  asks for work to earn his living, he must ask it of a white man; and the whites are determined to give him no work, except on such terms as will make him a serf and impair his liberty.
The Black Codes made an ugly impression in the North.
If the former slaves were being reenslaved, people asked one another, had not the Boys in Blue spilled their blood in vain?
Had the North really won the war?
These questions grew more insistent when the congressional delegations from the newly reconstituted Southern states presented themselves in the Capitol in December 1865.
To the shock and disgust of the Republicans, many former Confederate leaders were on hand to claim their seats.
The appearance of these ex-rebels was a natural but costly blunder.
Voters of the South, seeking able representatives, had turned instinctively to their experienced statesmen.
But most of the Southern leaders were tainted by active association with the lost cause.
Among them were four former Confederate generals, five colonels, and various members of the Richmond cabinet and Congress.
Worst of all, there was the shrimpy but brainy Alexander Stephens, exvice president of the Confederacy, still under indictment for treason.
The presence of these whitewashed rebels infuriated the Republicans in Congress.
The war had been fought to restore the Union, but not on these kinds of terms.
The Republicans were in no hurry to embrace their former enemiesvirtually all of them Democrats in the chambers of the Capitol.
While the South had been out from 1861 to 1865, the Republicans in Congress had enjoyed a relatively free hand.
They had passed much legislation that favored the North, such as the Morrill Tariff, the Pacific Railroad Act, and the Homestead Act.
Now many Republicans balked at giving up this political advantage.
On the first day of the congressional session, December 4, 1865, they banged shut the door in the face of the newly elected Southern delegations.
Looking to the future, the Republicans were alarmed to realize that a restored South would be stronger than ever in national politics.
Before the war a black slave had counted as three-fifths of a person in apportioning congressional representation.
Now the slave was five-fifths of a person.
Eleven Southern states had seceded and been subdued by force of arms.
But now, owing to full counting of free blacks, the rebel states were entitled to twelve more votes in Congress, and twelve more presidential electoral votes, than they had previously enjoyed.
Again, angry voices in the North raised the cry, Who won the war?
Republicans had good reason to fear that ultimately they might be elbowed aside.
Southerners might join hands with Democrats in the North and win control of Congress or maybe even the White House.
If this happened, they could perpetuate the Black Codes, virtually re-enslaving the blacks.
They could dismantle the economic program of the Republican party by lowering tariffs, rerouting the transcontinental railroad, repealing the free-farm Homestead Act, possibly even repudiating the national debt.
President Johnson thus deeply disturbed the congressional Republicans when he announced on December 6, 1865, that the recently rebellious states had satisfied his conditions and that in his view the Union was now restored.
A clash between president and Congress was now inevitable.
It exploded into the open in February 1866, when the president vetoed a bill (later repassed) extending the life of the controversial Freedmens Bureau.
Aroused, the Republicans swiftly struck back.
In March 1866 they passed the Civil Rights Bill, which conferred on blacks the privilege of American citizenship and struck at the Black Codes.
President Johnson resolutely vetoed this forward-looking measure on constitutional grounds, but in April congressmen steamrollered it over his vetosomething they repeatedly did henceforth.
The hapless president, dubbed Sir Veto and Andy Veto, had his presidential wings clipped, as Congress increasingly assumed the dominant role in running the government.
One critic called Johnson the dead dog of the White House.
The Republicans now undertook to rivet the principles of the Civil Rights Bill into the Constitution as the Fourteenth Amendment.
They feared that the Southerners might one day win control of Congress and repeal the hated law.
The proposed amendment, as approved by Congress and sent to the states in June 1866, was sweeping.
It (1) conferred civil rights, including citizenship but excluding the franchise, on the freedmen; (2) reduced C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 proportionately the representation of a state in Congress and in the Electoral College if it denied blacks the ballot; (3) disqualified from federal and state office former Confederates who as federal officeholders had once sworn to support the Constitution of the United States; and (4) guaranteed the federal debt, while repudiating all Confederate debts.
(See text of Fourteenth Amendment in the Appendix.
) The radical faction was disappointed that the Fourteenth Amendment did not grant the right to vote, but all Republicans were agreed that no state should be welcomed back into the Union fold without first ratifying the Fourteenth Amendment.
Yet President Johnson advised the Southern states to reject it, and all of the sinful eleven, except Tennessee, defiantly spurned the amendment.
Their spirit was reflected in a Southern song: As 1866 lengthened, the battle grew between the Congress and the president.
The root of the controversy was Johnsons 10 percent governments that had passed the most stringent Black Codes.
Congress had tried to temper the worst features of the codes by extending the life of the embattled Freedmens Bureau and passing the Civil Rights Bill.
Both measures Johnson had vetoed.
Now the issue was whether Reconstruction was to be carried on with or without the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Republicans would settle for nothing less.
The crucial congressional elections of 1866 more crucial than some presidential elections were fast approaching.
Johnson was naturally eager to escape from the clutch of Congress by securing a majority favorable to his soft-on-the-South policy.
Invited to dedicate a Chicago monument to Stephen A. Douglas, he undertook to speak at various cities en route in support of his views.
Johnsons famous swing round the circle, beginning in the late summer of 1866, was a serio18641865 Lincolns 10 percent proposal 18651866 Johnsons version of Lincolns proposal 18661867 Congressional plan: 10 percent plan with Fourteenth Amendment 18671877 Congressional plan of military Reconstruction: Fourteenth Amendment plus black suffrage, later established nationwide by Fifteenth Amendment comedy of errors.
The president delivered a series of give em hell speeches, in which he accused the radicals in Congress of having planned large-scale antiblack riots and murder in the South.
As he spoke, hecklers hurled insults at him.
Reverting to his stump-speaking days in Tennessee, he shouted back angry retorts, amid cries of You be damned and Dont get mad, Andy.
The dignity of his high office sank to a new low, as the old charges of drunkenness were revived.
As a vote-getter, Johnson was highly successfulfor the opposition.
His inept speechmaking heightened the cry Stand by Congress against the Tailor of the Potomac.
When the ballots were counted, the Republicans had rolled up more than a two-thirds majority in both houses  of Congress.
The Republicans now had a veto-proof Congress and virtually unlimited control of Reconstruction policy.
But moderates and radicals still disagreed over the best course to pursue in the South.
The radicals in the Senate were led by the courtly and principled idealist Charles Sumner, long since recovered from his prewar caning on the Senate floor, who tirelessly labored not only for black freedom but for racial equality.
In the House the most powerful radical was Thaddeus Stevens, crusty and vindictive congressman from Pennsylvania.
Seventy-four years old in 1866, he was a curious figure, with a protruding lower lip, a heavy black wig covering his bald head, and a deformed foot.
An unswerving friend of blacks, he had defended runaway slaves in court without fee and, before dying, insisted on burial in a black cemetery.
His affectionate devotion to blacks was matched by his vitriolic hatred of rebellious white Southerners.
A masterly parliamentarian with a razor-sharp mind and withering wit, Stevens was a  leading figure on the Joint (House-Senate) Committee on Reconstruction.
Still opposed to rapid restoration of the Southern states, the radicals wanted to keep them out as long as possible and apply federal power to bring about a drastic social and economic transformation in the South.
But moderate Republicans, more attuned to time-honored principles of states rights and self-government, recoiled from the full implications of the radical program.
They preferred policies that restrained the states from abridging citizens rights, rather than policies that directly involved the C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 I am for Negro suffrage in every rebel state.
If it be just, it should not be denied; if it be necessary, it should be adopted; if it be a punishment to traitors, they deserve it.
federal government in individual lives.
The actual policies adopted by Congress showed the influence of both these schools of thought, though the moderates, as the majority faction, had the upper hand.
And one thing both groups had come to agree on by 1867 was the necessity to enfranchise black voters, even if it took federal troops to do it.
Against a backdrop of vicious and bloody race riots that had erupted in several Southern cities, Congress passed the Reconstruction Act on March 2, 1867.
Supplemented by later measures, this drastic legislation divided the South into five military districts, each commanded by a Union general and policed by blue-clad soldiers, about twenty thousand all told.
The act also temporarily disfranchised tens of thousands of former Confederates.
Congress additionally laid down stringent conditions for the readmission of the seceded states.
The wayward states were required to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment, giving the former slaves their rights as citizens.
The bitterest pill of all to white Southerners was the stipulation that they guarantee in their state constitutions full suffrage for their former adult male slaves.
Yet the act, reflecting moderate sentiment, stopped short of giving the freedmen land or education at federal expense.
The overriding purpose of the moderates was to create an electorate in Southern states that would vote those states back into the Union on acceptable terms and thus free the federal government from direct responsibility for the protection of black rights.
As later events would demonstrate, this approach proved woefully inadequate to the cause of justice for blacks.
The radical Republicans were still worried.
The danger loomed that once the unrepentant states were readmitted, they would amend their constitutions so as to withdraw the ballot from the blacks.
The only ironclad safeguard was to incorporate black suffrage in the federal Constitution.
This goal was finally achieved by the Fifteenth Amendment, passed by Congress in 1869 and ratified by the required number of states in 1870.
(For text, see the Appendix.
) Military Reconstruction of the South not only usurped certain functions of the president as commander in chief but set up a martial regime of dubious legality.
The Supreme Court had already ruled, in the case  bunals could not try civilians, even during wartime, in areas where the civil courts were open.
Peacetime military rule seemed starkly contrary to the spirit of the Constitution.
But the circumstances were extraordinary in the Republics history, and for the time being the Supreme Court avoided offending the Republican Congress.
Prodded into line by federal bayonets, the Southern states got on with the task of constitution making.
By 1870 all of them had reorganized their governments and had been accorded full rights.
The hated bluebellies remained until the new Republican regimesusually called radical regimes appeared to be firmly entrenched.
Yet when the federal troops finally left a state, its government swiftly passed back into the hands of white Redeemers, or Home Rule regimes, which were inevitably Democratic.
Finally, in 1877, the last federal muskets were removed from state politics, and the solid Democratic South congealed.
The passage of the three Reconstruction-era Amendmentsthe Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenthdelighted former abolitionists but deeply disappointed advocates of womens rights.
Women had played a prominent part in the prewar abolitionist movement and had often pointed out that both women and blacks lacked basic civil rights, especially the crucial right to vote.
The struggle for black freedom and the crusade for womens rights, therefore, were one and the same in the eyes of many women.
Yet during the war, feminist leaders such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony had temporarily suspended their own demands and worked wholeheartedly for the cause of black emancipation.
The Womans Loyal League had gathered nearly 400,000 signatures on petitions asking Congress to pass a constitutional amendment prohibiting slavery.
Now, with the war ended and the Thirteenth Amendment passed, feminist leaders believed that their time had come.
They reeled with shock, however, when the wording of the Fourteenth Amendment, which defined equal national citizenship, for C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 Military Reconstruction, 1867 (five districts and commanding generals) For many white Southerners, military Reconstruction amounted to turning the knife in the wound of defeat.
An often-repeated story of later years had a Southerner remark, I was sixteen years old  before I discovered that damnyankee was two words.
Tennessee July 24, 1866 Ratified Fourteenth Amendment in 1866 and  hence avoided military Reconstruction* Arkansas June 22, 1868 1874 North Carolina June 25, 1868 1870 Alabama June 25, 1868 1874 Florida June 25, 1868 1877 Federal troops restationed in 1877, as result of  Hayes-Tilden electoral bargain Louisiana June 25, 1868 1877 Same as Florida South Carolina June 25, 1868 1877 Same as Florida Virginia January 26, 1870 1869 Mississippi February 23, 1870 1876 Texas March 30, 1870 1874 Georgia [June 25, 1868] 1872 Readmitted June 25, 1868, but returned to  July 15, 1870 military control after expulsion of blacks  from legislature *For many years Tennessee was the only state of the secession to observe Lincolns birthday  as a legal holiday.
Many southern states still observe the birthdays of Jefferson Davis and  Robert E. Lee.
the first time inserted the word  stitution in referring to a citizens right to vote.
Both Stanton and Anthony campaigned actively against the Fourteenth Amendment despite the pleas of Frederick Douglass, who had long supported woman suffrage but believed that this was the Negros hour.
When the Fifteenth Amendment proposed to prohibit denial of the vote on the basis of race, color, or previous condition of servitude, Stanton and Anthony wanted the word  the list.
They lost this battle, too.
Fifty years would pass before the Constitution granted women the right to vote.
The blacks now had freedom, of a sort.
Their friends in Congress had only haltingly and somewhat belatedly secured the franchise for them.
Both Presidents Lincoln and Johnson had proposed to give the ballot gradually to selected blacks who qualified for it through education, property ownership, or military service.
Moderate Republicans and even many radicals at first hesitated to bestow suffrage on the freedmen.
The Fourteenth Amendment, in many ways the heart of the Republican program for Reconstruction, had fallen short of guaranteeing the right to vote.
(It envisioned for blacks the same status as womencitizenship without voting rights.
) But by 1867 hesitation had given way to a hard determination to enfranchise the former slaves wholesale and immediately, while thousands of white Southerners were being denied the vote.
By glaring contrast most of the Northern states, before ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment in 1870, withheld the ballot from their tiny black minorities.
White Southerners naturally concluded that the Republicans were hypocritical in insisting that blacks in the South be allowed to vote.
Having gained their right to suffrage, Southern black men seized the initiative and began to organize politically.
Their primary vehicle became the Union League, originally a pro-Union organization based in the North.
Assisted by Northern blacks, freedmen turned the League into a network of political clubs that educated members in their civic duties and campaigned for Republican candidates.
The leagues mission soon expanded to include building black churches and schools, representing black grievances before local employers and government, and recruiting militias to protect black communities from white retaliation.
Though African-American women did not obtain the right to vote, they too assumed new political roles.
Black women faithfully attended the parades and rallies common in black communities during the early years of Reconstruction and helped assemble mass meetings in the newly constructed black churches.
They even showed up at the constitutional conventions held throughout the South in 1867, monitoring the proceedings and participating in informal votes outside the convention halls.
But black men elected as delegates to the state constitutional conventions held the greater political authority.
They formed the backbone of the black political community.
At the conventions, they sat down with whites to hammer out new state constitutions, which most importantly provided for universal male suffrage.
Though the subsequent elections produced no black governors or majorities in state senates, black political participation expanded exponentially during Reconstruction.
Between 1868 and 1876, fourteen black congressmen and two black senators, Hiram Revels and Blanche K. Bruce, both of Mississippi, served in Washington, D.C.
Blacks also served in state governments as lieutenant governors and representatives, and in local governments as mayors, magistrates, sheriffs, and justices of the peace.
Look at this, all of you.
And hear me swear that I will cut off this right arm of mine before I will ever work for or demand the ballot for the negro and not the woman.
The sight of former slaves holding office deeply offended their onetime masters, who lashed out with particular fury at the freedmens white allies, labeling them scalawags and carpetbaggers.
The so-called scalawags were Southerners, often former Unionists and Whigs.
The former Confederates accused them, often with wild exaggeration, of plundering the treasuries of the Southern states through their political influence in the radical governments.
The carpetbaggers, on the other hand, were supposedly sleazy Northerners who had packed all their worldly goods into a carpetbag suitcase at wars end and had come South to seek personal power and profit.
In fact, most were former Union soldiers and Northern businessmen and professionals who wanted to play a role in modernizing the New South.
How well did the radical regimes rule?
The radical legislatures passed much desirable legislation and introduced many badly needed reforms.
For the first time in Southern history, steps were taken toward establishing adequate public schools.
Tax systems were streamlined; public works were launched; and property rights were guaranteed to women.
Many welcome reforms were retained by the all-white Redeemer governments that later returned to power.
Despite these achievements, graft ran rampant in many radical governments.
This was especially true in South Carolina and Louisiana, where conC HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 We claim exactly the same rights, privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by white menwe ask nothing more and will be content with nothing less.
The law no longer knows white nor black, but simply men, and consequently we are entitled to ride in public conveyances, hold office, sit on juries and do everything else which we have in the past been prevented from doing solely on the ground of color.
scienceless promoters and other pocket-padders used politically inexperienced blacks as pawns.
The worst black-and-white legislatures purchased, as legislative supplies, such stationery as hams, perfumes, suspenders, bonnets, corsets, champagne, and a coffin.
One thrifty carpetbag governor in a single year saved $100,000 from a salary of $8,000.
Yet this sort of corruption was by no means confined to the South in these postwar years.
The crimes of the Reconstruction governments were no more outrageous than the scams and felonies being perpetrated in the North at the same time, especially in Boss Tweeds New York.
Deeply embittered, some Southern whites resorted to savage measures against radical rule.
Many whites resented the success and ability of black  legislators as much as they resented alleged corruption.
A number of secret organizations mushroomed forth, the most notorious of which was the Invisible Empire of the South, or Ku Klux Klan, founded in Tennessee in 1866.
Besheeted nightriders, their horses hoofs muffled, would approach the cabin of an upstart black and hammer on the door.
In ghoulish tones one thirsty horseman would demand a bucket of water.
Then, under pretense of drinking, he would pour it into a rubber attachment concealed beneath his mask and gown, smack his lips, and declare that this was the first water he had tasted since he was killed at the Battle of Shiloh.
If fright did not produce the desired effect, force was employed.
Such tomfoolery and terror proved partially effective.
Many ex-bondsmen and white carpetbaggers, quick to take a hint, shunned the polls.
Those stubborn souls who persisted in their upstart ways were flogged, mutilated, or even murdered.
In one Louisiana parish in 1868, the whites in two days killed or wounded two hundred victims; a pile of twenty-five bodies was found halfburied in the woods.
By such atrocious practices were blacks kept in their placethat is, down.
The Klan became a refuge for numerous bandits and cutthroats.
Any scoundrel could don a sheet.
Congress, outraged by this night-riding lawlessness, passed the harsh Force Acts of 1870 and 1871.
Federal troops were able to stamp out much of the lash law, but by this time the Invisible Empire had already done its work of intimidation.
Many of the outlawed groups continued their tactics in the guise of dancing clubs, missionary societies, and rifle clubs.
White resistance undermined attempts to empower the blacks politically.
The white South,  for many decades, openly flouted the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments.
Wholesale disfranchisement of the blacks, starting conspicuously about 1890, was achieved by intimidation, fraud, and trickery.
Among various underhanded schemes were the literacy tests, unfairly administered by whites to the advantage of illiterate whites.
In the eyes of the white Southerners, the goal of white supremacy fully justified these dishonorable devices.
Radicals meanwhile had been sharpening their hatchets for President Johnson.
Annoyed by the obstruction of the drunken tailor in the White House, they falsely accused him of maintaining there a harem of dissolute women.
Not content with curbing his authority, they decided to remove him altogether by constitutional processes.
* Under C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 *For impeachment, see Art.
I, Sec.
II, para.
5; Art.
I, Sec.
III, paras.
6, 7; Art.
II, Sec.
IV, in the Appendix.
We believe you are not familiar with the description of the Ku Klux Klans riding nightly over the country, going from county to county, and in the county towns, spreading terror wherever they go by robbing, whipping, ravishing, and killing our people without provocation, compelling colored people to break the ice and bathe in the chilly waters of the Kentucky River.
The [state] legislature has adjourned.
They refused to enact any laws to suppress Ku-Klux disorder.
We regard them [the KuKluxers] as now being licensed to continue their dark and bloody deeds under cover of the dark night.
They refuse to allow us to testify in the state courts where a white man is concerned.
We find their deeds are perpetrated only upon colored men and white Republicans.
We also find that for our services to the government and our race we have become the special object of hatred and persecution at the hands of the Democratic Party.
Our people are driven from their homes in great numbers, having no redress only [except] the United States court, which  is in many cases unable to reach them.
existing law the president pro tempore of the Senate, the unscrupulous and rabidly radical Bluff Ben Wade of Ohio, would then become president.
As an initial step, Congress in 1867 passed the Tenure of Office Actas usual, over Johnsons veto.
Contrary to precedent, the new law required the president to secure the consent of the Senate before he could remove his appointees once they had been approved by that body.
One purpose was to freeze into the cabinet the secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, a holdover from the Lincoln administration.
Although outwardly loyal to Johnson, he was secretly serving as a spy and informer for the radicals.
Johnson provided the radicals with a pretext to begin impeachment proceedings when he abruptly dismissed Stanton early in 1868.
The House of  Representatives immediately voted 126 to 47 to impeach Johnson for high crimes and misdemeanors, as required by the Constitution, charging him with various violations of the Tenure of Office Act.
Two additional articles related to Johnsons verbal assaults on the Congress, involving disgrace, ridicule, hatred, contempt, and reproach.
With evident zeal the radical-led Senate now sat as a court to try Johnson on the dubious impeachment charges.
The House conducted the prosecution.
The trial aroused intense public interest and, with one thousand tickets printed, proved to be the biggest show of 1868.
Johnson kept his dignity and sobriety and maintained a discreet silence.
His battery of attorneys argued that the president, convinced that the Tenure of Office Act was unconstitutional, had fired Stanton merely to put a test case before the Supreme Court.
(That slow-moving tribunal finally ruled indirectly in Johnsons favor fifty-eight years later.
) House prosecutors, including oily-tongued Benjamin F. Butler and embittered Thaddeus Stevens, had a harder time building a compelling case for impeachment.
On May 16, 1868, the day for the first voting in the Senate, the tension was electric, and heavy breathing could be heard in the galleries.
By a margin of only one vote, the radicals failed to muster the two-thirds majority for Johnsons removal.
Seven independent-minded Republican senators, courageously putting country above party, voted not guilty.
Several factors shaped the outcome.
Fears of creating a destabilizing precedent played a role, as did principled opposition to abusing the constitutional mechanism of checks and balances.
Political considerations also figured conspicuously.
As the vice presidency remained vacant under Johnson, his successor would have been radical Republican Ben Wade, the president pro tempore of the Senate.
Wade was disliked by many members of the business community for his high-tariff, soft-money,  prolabor views, and distrusted by moderate Republicans.
Meanwhile, Johnson indicated through his attorney that he would stop obstructing Republican policies in return for remaining in office.
Die-hard radicals were infuriated by their failure to muster a two-thirds majority for Johnsons removal.
The Country is going to the Devil!
cried the crippled Stevens as he was carried from the hall.
But the nation, though violently aroused, accepted the verdict with a good temper that did credit to  its political maturity.
In a less stable republic, an armed uprising might have erupted against the president.
The nation thus narrowly avoided a dangerous precedent that would have gravely weakened one of the three branches of the federal government.
Johnson was clearly guilty of bad speeches, bad judgment, and bad temper, but not of high crimes and misdemeanors.
From the standpoint of the radicals, his greatest crime had been to stand inflexibly in their path.
It is extraordinary that a race such as yours, professing gallantry, chivalry, education, and superiority, living in a land where ringing chimes call child and sire to the Gospel of Godthat with all these advantages on your side, you can make war upon the poor defenseless black man.
Johnsons administration, though largely reduced to a figurehead, achieved its most enduring success in the field of foreign relations.
The Russians by 1867 were in a mood to sell the vast and chilly expanse of land now known as Alaska.
They had already overextended themselves in North America, and they saw that in the likely event of another war with Britain, they probably would lose their defenseless northern province to the sea-dominant British.
Alaska, moreover, had been ruthlessly furred out and was a growing economic liability.
The Russians were therefore quite eager to unload their frozen asset on the Americans, and they put out seductive feelers in Washington.
They preferred the United States to any other purchaser, primarily because they wanted to strengthen further the Republic as a barrier against their ancient enemy, Britain.
In 1867 Secretary of State William Seward, an ardent expansionist, signed a treaty with Russia that transferred Alaska to the United States for the bargain price of $7.2 million.
But Sewards enthusiasm for these frigid wastes was not shared by his ignorant or uninformed countrymen, who jeered at Sewards Folly, Sewards Icebox, Frigidia, and Walrussia.
The American people, still preoccupied with Reconstruction and other internal vexations, were economy-minded and anti-expansionist.
Then why did Congress and the American public sanction the purchase?
For one thing Russia, alone among the powers, had been conspicuously friendly to the North during the recent Civil War.
Americans did not feel that they could offend their great and good friend, the tsar, by hurling his  walrus-covered icebergs back into his face.
Besides, C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 Alaska and the Lower Forty-eight States  (a size comparison)  the territory was rumored to be teeming with furs, fish, and gold, and it might yet pan out profitablyas it later did with natural resources, including oil and gas.
So Congress and the country accepted Sewards Polar Bear Garden, somewhat derisively but nevertheless hopefully.
Many white Southerners regarded Reconstruction as a more grievous wound than the war itself.
It left a festering scar that would take generations to heal.
They resented the upending of their social and racial system, political empowerment of blacks, and the insult of federal intervention in their local affairs.
Yet few rebellions have ended with the victors sitting down to a love feast with the vanquished.
Given the explosiveness of the issues that had caused the war, and the bitterness of the fighting, the wonder is that Reconstruction was not far harsher than it was.
The fact is that Lincoln, Johnson, and most Republicans had no clear picture at wars end of what federal policy toward the South should be.
Policymakers groped for the right policies, influenced as much by Southern responses to defeat and emancipation as by any plans of their own to impose a specific program on the South.
The Republicans acted from a mixture of idealism and political expediency.
They wanted both to protect the freed slaves and to promote the fortunes of the Republican party.
In the end their efforts backfired badly.
Reconstruction conferred only fleeting benefits on the blacks and virtually extinguished the Republican party in the South for nearly one hundred years.
Moderate Republicans never fully appreciated the extensive effort necessary to make the freed slaves completely independent citizens, nor the lengths to which Southern whites would go to preserve their system of racial dominance.
Had Thaddeus Stevenss radical program of drastic economic reforms and heftier protection of political rights been enacted, things might well have been different.
But deep-seated racism, ingrained American resistance to tampering with property rights, and rigid loyalty to the principle of local self-government, combined with spreading indifference in the North to the plight of the blacks, formed too formidable an obstacle.
Despite good intentions by Republicans, the Old South was in many ways more resurrected than reconstructed.
Though slavery was abolished, the wrongs of my people were not ended.
Though they were not slaves, they were not yet quite free.
No man can be truly free whose liberty is dependent upon the thought, feeling, and action of others, and who has himself no means in his own hands for guarding, protecting, defending, and maintaining that liberty.
Yet the Negro after his emancipation was precisely in this state of destitution.
He was free from the individual master, but the slave of society.
He had neither money, property, nor friends.
He was free from the old plantation, but he had nothing but the dusty road under his feet.
He was free from the old quarter that once gave him shelter, but a slave to the rains of summer and the frosts of winter.
He was, in a word, literally turned loose, naked, hungry, and destitute, to the open sky.
C HAPTER 22 The Ordeal of Reconstruction, 18651877 ew topics have triggered as much intellectual warfare as the dark and bloody ground of Reconstruction.
The period provoked questions sectional, racial, and constitutionalabout which people felt deeply and remain deeply divided even today.
Scholarly argument goes back conspicuously to a Columbia University historian, William A. Dunning, whose students, in the early 1900s, published a series of histories of the Reconstruction South.
Dunning and his disciples were influenced by the turn-of-the-century spirit of sectional conciliation as well as by current theories about black racial inferiority.
Sympathizing with the white South, they wrote about the Reconstruction period as a kind of national disgrace, foisted upon a prostrate region by vindictive and self-seeking radical Republican politicians.
If the South had wronged the North by seceding, the North had wronged the South by reconstructing.
A second cycle of scholarship in the 1920s was impelled by a widespread suspicion that the Civil War itself had been a tragic and unnecessary blunder.
Attention now shifted to Northern politicians.
Scholars like Howard Beale further questioned the motives of the radical Republicans.
To Beale and others, the radicals had masked a ruthless desire to exploit Southern labor and resources behind a false front of concern for the freed slaves.
Moreover, Northern advocacy of black voting rights was merely a calculated attempt to ensure a Republican political presence in the defeated South.
The unfortunate Andrew Johnson, in this view, had valiantly Lincoln announces 10 percent Reconstruction plan Lincoln vetoes Wade-Davis Bill Lincoln assassinated Johnson issues Reconstruction proclamation Congress refuses to seat Southern congressmen Freedmens Bureau established Southern states pass Black Codes Congress passes Civil Rights Bill over Johnsons veto Congress passes Fourteenth Amendment Johnson-backed candidates lose congressional election Ku Klux Klan founded Reconstruction Act Tenure of Office Act United States purchases Alaska from Russia Johnson impeached and acquitted Johnson pardons Confederate leaders Fifteenth Amendment ratified Force Acts Freedmens Bureau ended Reconstruction ends tried to uphold constitutional principles in the face of this cynical Northern onslaught.
Following World War II, Kenneth Stampp, among others, turned this view on its head.
Influenced by the modern civil rights movement, he argued that Reconstruction had been a noble attempt to extend American principles of equity and justice.
The radical Republicans and the carpetbaggers were now heroes, whereas Andrew Johnson was castigated for his obstinate racism.
By the early 1970s, this view had become orthodoxy, and it generally holds sway today.
Yet some scholars, such as Michael Benedict and Leon Litwack, disillusioned with the inability to achieve full racial justice in the 1960s, began once more to scrutinize the motives of Northern politicians immediately after the Civil War.
They claimed to discover that Reconstruction had never been very radical and that the Freedmens Bureau and other agencies had merely allowed the white planters to maintain their dominance over local politics as well as over the local economy.
More recently, Eric Foner has powerfully reasserted the argument that Reconstruction was a truly radical and noble attempt to establish an interracial democracy.
Drawing upon the work of black scholar W. E. B. Du Bois, Foner emphasizes the comparative approach to American Reconstruction.
Clearly, Foner admits, Reconstruction did not create full equality, but it did allow blacks to form political organizations and churches, to vote, and  to establish some measure of economic independence.
In South Africa, the Caribbean, and other areas once marked by slavery, the freed slaves never received these opportunities.
Many of the benefits of Reconstruction were erased by white southerners during the Gilded Age, but in the twentieth century, the constitutional principles and organizations developed during Reconstruction provided the focus and foundation for the modern civil rights movementwhich some have called the second Reconstruction.
For further reading, see page A16 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  F ORGING AN I NDUSTRIAL S OCIETY  18651899 A nation of farmers fought the Civil War in the 1860s.
By the time the Spanish-American War broke out in 1898, America was an industrial nation.
For generations Americans had plunged into the wilderness and plowed their fields.
Now they settled in cities and toiled in factories.
Between the Civil War and the centurys end, economic and technological change came so swiftly and massively that it seemed to many Americans that a whole new civilization had emerged.
In some ways it had.
The sheer scale of the new industrial civilization was dazzling.
Transcontinental railroads knit the country together from sea to sea.
New industries like oil and steel grew to staggering sizeand made megamillionaires out of entrepreneurs like oilman John D. Rockefeller and steel maker Andrew Carnegie.
Drawn by the allure of industrial employment, Americans moved to the city.
In 1860 only about 20 percent of the population were city dwellers.
By 1900 that proportion doubled, as rural Americans and European immigrants alike flocked to mill town and metropolis in search of steady jobs.
These sweeping changes challenged the spirit of individualism that Americans had celebrated since the seventeenth century.
Even on the western frontier, that historic bastion of rugged loners, the hand of government was increasingly felt, as large armies were dispatched to subdue the Plains Indians and federal authority was invoked to regulate the use of natural resources.
The rise of powerful monopolies called into question the governments traditional hands-off policy toward business, and a growing band of reformers increasingly clamored for government regulation of private enterprise.
The mushrooming cities, with their needs for transport systems, schools, hospitals, sanitation, and fire and police protection, required bigger governments and budgets than an earlier generation could have imagined.
As never before, Americans struggled to adapt old ideals of private autonomy to the new realities of industrial civilization.
With economic change came social and political turmoil.
Labor violence brought bloodshed to places such as Chicago and Homestead, Pennsylvania.
Small farmers, squeezed by debt and foreign competition, rallied behind the Peoples, or Populist, party, a radical movement of the 1880s and 1890s that attacked the power of Wall Street, big business, and the banks.
Anti-immigrant sentiment swelled.
Bitter disputes over tariffs and monetary policy deeply divided the country, setting debtors against lenders, farmers against manufacturers, the West and South against the Northeast.
And in this unfamiliar era of big money and expanding government, corruption flourished, from town hall to Congress, fueling loud cries for political reform.
The bloodiest conflict of all pitted Plains Indians against the relentless push of westward expansion.
As railroads drove their iron arrows through the heart of the West, the Indians lost their land and life-sustaining buffalo herds.
By the 1890s, after three decades of fierce fighting with the U.S.
Army, the Indians who had once roamed across the vast rolling prairies were struggling to preserve their shattered cultures within the confinement of reservations.
The South remained the one region largely untouched by the Industrial Revolution sweeping the rest of America.
A few sleepy southern hamlets did become boomtowns, but for the most part, the Souths rural way of life and its peculiar system of race relations were largely unperturbed by the changes happening elsewhere.
On African-Americans, the vast majority of whom continued to live in the Old South, the post-emancipation era inflicted new forms of racial injustice.
State legislatures systematically deprived black Americans of their political rights, including the right to vote.
Segregation of schools, housing, and all kinds of public facilities made a mockery of African-Americans Reconstruction-era hopes for equality before the law.
The new wealth and power of industrial America nurtured a growing sense of national self-confidence.
Literature flowered, and a golden age of philanthropy dawned.
The reform spirit spread.
So did a restless appetite for overseas expansion.
In a brief war against Spain in 1898, the United States, born in a revolutionary war of independence and long the champion of colonial peoples yearning to breathe free, seized control of the Philippines and itself became an imperial power.
Uncle Sams venture into empire touched off a bitter national debate about Americas role in the world and ushered in a long period of argument over the responsibilities, at home as well as abroad, of a modern industrial state.
Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age  18691896 H ENRY A DAMS , T HE E DUCATION OF H ENRY A DAMS , 1907 T he population of the postCivil War Republic continued to vault upward by vigorous leaps, despite the awful bloodletting in both Union and Confederate ranks.
Census takers reported over 39 million people in 1870, a gain of 26.6 percent over the preceding decade, as the immigrant tide surged again.
The United States was now the third largest nation in the Western world, ranking behind Russia and France.
But the civic health of the United States did not keep pace with its physical growth.
The Civil War and its aftermath spawned waste, extravagance, speculation, and graft.
Disillusionment ran deep among idealistic Americans in the postwar era.
They had spilled their blood for the Union, emancipation, and Abraham Lincoln, who had promised a new birth of freedom.
Instead they got a bitter dose of corruption and political stalematebeginning with Ulysses S. Grant, a great soldier but an utterly inept politician.
Wrangling between Congress and President Andrew Johnson had soured the people on professional politicians in the Reconstruction era, and the notion still prevailed that a good general would make a good president.
Stubbily bearded General Grant was by far the most popular Northern hero to emerge from the war.
Grateful citizens of Philadelphia, Washington, and his hometown of Galena, Illinois, passed the hat around and in each place presented him with a house.
New Yorkers tendered him a check for $105,000.
The general, silently puffing on his cigar, unapologetically accepted these gifts as his just deserts for having rescued the Union.
Grant was a hapless greenhorn in the political arena.
His one presidential vote had been cast for the Democratic ticket in 1856.
A better judge of horseflesh than of humans, his cultural background was breathtakingly narrow.
He once reportedly remarked that Venice (Italy) would be a fine city if only it were drained.
The Republicans, freed from the Union party coalition of war days, enthusiastically nominated Grant for the presidency in 1868.
The partys platform sounded a clarion call for continued Reconstruction of the South under the glinting steel of federal bayonets.
Yet Grant, always a man of few words, struck a highly popular note in his letter of acceptance when he said, Let us have peace.
This noble sentiment became a leading campaign slogan and was later engraved on his tomb beside the Hudson River.
Expectant Democrats, meeting in their own nominating convention, denounced military Reconstruction but could agree on little else.
Wealthy eastern delegates demanded a plank promising that federal war bonds be redeemed in goldeven though many of the bonds had been purchased with badly depreciated paper greenbacks.
Poorer midwestern delegates answered with the Ohio Idea, which called for redemption in greenbacks.
Debtburdened agrarian Democrats thus hoped to keep more money in circulation and keep interest rates lower.
This dispute introduced a bitter contest over monetary policy that continued to convulse the Republic until the centurys end.
Midwestern delegates got the platform but not the candidate.
The nominee, former New York governor Horatio Seymour, scuttled the Democrats faint hope for success by repudiating the Ohio Idea.
Republicans whipped up enthusiasm for Grant by energetically waving the bloody shirtthat is, reviving gory memories of the Civil Warwhich became for the first time a prominent feature of a presidential campaign.
* Vote as You Shot was a powerful Republican slogan aimed at Union army veterans.
Grant won, with 214 electoral votes to 80 for Seymour.
But despite his great popularity, the former general scored a majority of only 300,000 in the popular vote (3,013,421 to 2,706,829).
Most white voters apparently supported Seymour, and the ballots of three still-unreconstructed southern states (Mississippi, Texas, and Virginia) were not counted at all.
An estimated 500,000 former slaves gave Grant his margin of victory.
To remain in power, the Republican party somehow had to continue to control the Southand to keep the ballot in the hands of the grateful freedmen.
Republicans could not take future victories for Granted.
A few skunks can pollute a large area.
Although the great majority of businesspeople and government officials continued to conduct their affairs with decency and honor, the whole postwar atmosphere was fetid.
The Man in the Moon, it was said, had to hold his nose when passing over America.
Freewheeling railroad promoters sometimes left gullible bond buyers with only two streaks of rust and a right of way.
Unscrupulous stock-market manipulators were a cinder in the public eye.
Too many judges and legislators put their power up for hire.
Cynics defined an honest politician as one who, when bought, would stay bought.
Notorious in the financial world were two millionaire partners, Jubilee Jim Fisk and Jay Gould.
The corpulent and unscrupulous Fisk provided the brass, while the undersized and cunning Gould provided the brains.
The crafty pair concocted a plot in 1869 to corner the gold market.
Their slippery game would work only if the federal Treasury refrained from selling gold.
The conspirators worked on President Grant directly and also through his brother-in-law, who received $25,000 for his complicity.
On Black Friday (September 24, 1869), Fisk and Gould madly bid the price of gold skyward, while scores of honest businesspeople were driven to the wall.
The bubble finally broke when the Treasury, contrary to Grants supposed assurances, was compelled to release gold.
A congressional probe concluded that Grant had done nothing crooked, though he had acted stupidly and indiscreetly.
*The expression is said to have derived from a speech by Representative Benjamin F. Butler of Massachusetts, who allegedly waved before the House the bloodstained nightshirt of a Klan-flogged carpetbagger.
The infamous Tweed Ring in New York City vividly displayed the ethics (or lack of ethics) typical of the age.
Burly Boss Tweed240 pounds of rascalityemployed bribery, graft, and fraudulent elections to milk the metropolis of as much as $200 million.
Honest citizens were cowed into silence.
Protesters found their tax assessments raised.
Tweeds luck finally ran out.
The  secured damning evidence in 1871 and courageously published it, though offered $5 million not to do so.
Gifted cartoonist Thomas Nast pilloried Tweed mercilessly, after spurning a heavy bribe to desist.
The portly thief reportedly complained that his illiterate followers could not help seeing them damn pictures.
New York attorney Samuel J. Tilden headed the prosecution, gaining fame that later paved the path to his presidential nomination.
Unbailed and unwept, Tweed died behind bars.
More serious than Boss Tweeds peccadilloes were the misdeeds of the federal government.
President Grants cabinet was a rodents nest of grafters and incompetents.
Favor seekers haunted the White House, plying Grant himself with cigars, wines, and horses.
His election was a godsend to his in-laws of the Dent family, several dozen of whom attached themselves to the public payroll.
The easygoing Grant was first tarred by the Crdit Mobilier scandal, which erupted in 1872.
Union Pacific Railroad insiders had formed the Crdit Mobilier construction company and then cleverly hired themselves at inflated prices to build the railroad line, earning dividends as high as 348 percent.
Fearing that Congress might blow the whistle, the company furtively distributed shares of its valuable stock to key congressmen.
A newspaper expos and congressional investigation of the scandal led to the formal censure of two congressmen and the revelation that the vice president of the United States had accepted payments from Crdit Mobilier.
The breath of scandal in Washington also reeked of alcohol.
In 18741875 the sprawling Whiskey Ring robbed the Treasury of millions in excise-tax revenues.
Let no guilty man escape, declared President Grant.
But when his own private secretary turned up among the culprits, he volunteered a written statement to the jury that helped exonerate the thief.
Further rottenness in the Grant administration came to light in 1876, forcing Secretary of War William Belknap to resign after pocketing bribes from suppliers to the Indian reservations.
Grant, ever loyal to his crooked cronies, accepted Belknaps resignation with great regret.
By 1872 a powerful wave of disgust with Grantism was beginning to build up throughout the nation, even before some of the worst scandals had been C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 exposed.
Reform-minded citizens banded together to form the Liberal Republican party.
Voicing the slogan Turn the Rascals Out, they urged purification of the Washington administration as well as an end to military Reconstruction.
The Liberal Republicans muffed their chance when their Cincinnati nominating convention astounded the country by nominating the brilliant but erratic Horace Greeley for the presidency.
Although Greeley was the fearless editor of the  and notoriously unsound in his political judgments.
More astonishing still was the action of the office-hungry Democrats, who foolishly proceeded to endorse Greeleys candidacy.
In swallowing Greeley the Democrats ate crow in large gulps, for the eccentric editor had long blasted them as traitors, slave shippers, saloon keepers, horse thieves, and idiots.
Yet Greeley pleased the Democrats, North and South, when he pleaded for clasping hands across the bloody chasm.
The Republicans dutifully renominated Grant.
The voters were thus presented with a choice between two candidates who had made their careers in fields other than politics and who were both eminently unqualified, by temperament and lifelong training, for high political office.
Everybody is talkin these days about Tammany men growin rich on graft, but nobody thinks of drawin the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft.
Theres all the difference in the world between the two.
Yes, many of our men have grown rich in politics.
I have myself.
Ive made a big fortune out of the game, and Im gettin richer every day, but Ive not gone in for dishonest graft blackmailin gamblers, saloonkeepers, disorderly people, etc.and neither has any of the men who have made big fortunes in politics.
Theres an honest graft, and Im an example of how it works.
I might sum up the whole thing by sayin: I seen my opportunities and I took em.
Just let me explain by examples.
My partys in power in the city, and its goin to undertake a lot of public improvements.
Well, Im tipped off, say, that theyre going to lay out a new park at a certain place.
I see my opportunity and I take it.
I go to that place and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood.
Then the board of this or that makes its plan public, and there is a rush to get my land, which nobody cared particular for before.
Aint it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight?
Of course, it is.
Well, thats honest graft.
In the mud-spattered campaign that followed, regular Republicans denounced Greeley as an atheist, a communist, a free-lover, a vegetarian, a brownbread eater, and a cosigner of Jefferson Daviss bail bond.
Democrats derided Grant as an ignoramus, a drunkard, and a swindler.
But the regular Republicans, chanting Grant us another term, pulled the president through.
The count in the electoral column was 286 to 66, in the popular column 3,596,745 to 2,843,446.
Liberal Republican agitation frightened the regular Republicans into cleaning their own house before they were thrown out of it.
The Republican Congress in 1872 passed a general amnesty act, removing political disabilities from all but some  five hundred former Confederate leaders.
Congress also moved to reduce high Civil War tariffs and to fumigate the Grant administration with mild civilservice reform.
Like many American third parties, the Liberal Republicans left some enduring footprints, even in defeat.
Grants woes deepened in the paralyzing economic panic that broke in 1873.
Bursting with startling rapidity, the crash was one of those periodic plummets that roller-coastered the economy in this age of unbridled capitalist expansion.
Overreaching promoters had laid more railroad track, sunk more mines, erected more factories, and sowed more grainfields than existing markets could bear.
Bankers, in turn, had made too many imprudent loans to finance those enterprises.
When profits failed to materialize, loans went unpaid, and the whole credit-based house of cards fluttered down.
Boom times became gloom times as more than fifteen thousand businesses went bankrupt.
In New York City, an army of unemployed riotously battled police.
Black Americans were hard hit.
The Freedmans Savings and Trust Company had made unsecured loans to several companies that went under.
Black depositors who had entrusted over $7 million to the bank lost their savings, and black economic development and black confidence in savings institutions went down with it.
Hard times inflicted the worst punishment on debtors, who intensified their clamor for inflationary policies.
Proponents of inflation breathed new life into the issue of greenbacks.
During the war $450 million of the folding money had been issued, but it had depreciated under a cloud of popular mistrust and dubious legality.
* By 1868 the Treasury had already withdrawn $100 million of the battle-born currency from circulation, and hardmoney people everywhere looked forward to its complete disappearance.
But now afflicted agrarian and debtor groupscheap-money supporters clamored for a reissuance of the greenbacks.
With a crude but essentially accurate grasp of monetary theory, they reasoned that more money meant cheaper money and, hence, rising prices and easierto-pay debts.
Creditors, of course, reasoning from the same premises, advocated precisely the opposite policy.
They had no desire to see the money they had loaned repaid in depreciated dollars.
They wanted deflation, not inflation.
The hard-money advocates carried the day.
In 1874 they persuaded a confused Grant to veto a bill to print more paper money.
They scored another victory in the Resumption Act of 1875, which pledged the government to the further withdrawal of greenbacks from circulation and to the redemption of all paper currency in gold at face value, beginning in 1879.
Down but not out, debtors now looked for relief to another precious metal, silver.
The sacred white metal, they claimed, had received a raw deal.
In the early 1870s, the Treasury stubbornly and unrealistically maintained that an ounce of silver was worth only one-sixteenth as much as an ounce of gold, though open-market prices for silver were higher.
Silver miners thus stopped offering their shiny product for sale to the federal mints.
With no silver flowing into the federal coffers, Congress formally dropped the coinage of silver dollars in 1873.
Fate then played a sly joke when new silver discoveries later in the 1870s shot production up and forced silver prices down.
Westerners from silver-mining states joined with debtors in assailing the Crime of 73, demanding a return to the Dollar of Our Daddies.
Like the demand for more greenbacks, the demand for the coinage of more silver was nothing C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 *The Supreme Court in 1870 declared the Civil War Legal Tender Act unconstitutional.
With the concurrence of the Senate, Grant thereupon added to the bench two justices who could be counted on to help reverse that decision, which happened in 1871.
This is how the Court grew to its current size of nine justices.
more nor less than another scheme to promote inflation.
Hard-money Republicans resisted this scheme and counted on Grant to hold the line against it.
He did not disappoint them.
The Treasury began to accumulate gold stocks against the appointed day for resumption of metallic-money payments.
Coupled with the reduction of greenbacks, this policy was called contraction.
It had a noticeable deflationary effectthe amount of money per capita in circulation actually  1880, from $19.42 to $19.37.
Contraction probably worsened the impact of the depression.
But the new policy did restore the governments credit rating, and it brought the embattled greenbacks up to their full face value.
When Redemption Day came in 1879, few greenback holders bothered to exchange the lighter and more convenient bills for gold.
Republican hard-money policy had a political backlash.
It helped elect a Democratic House of Representatives in 1874, and in 1878 it spawned the Greenback Labor party, which polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of Congress.
The contest over monetary policy was far from over.
The political seesaw was delicately balanced throughout most of the Gilded Age (a sarcastic name given to the three-decade-long postCivil War era by Mark Twain in 1873).
Even a slight nudge could tip the teeter-totter to the advantage of the opposition party.
Every presidential election was  a squeaker, and the majority party in the House of Representatives switched six times in the eleven sessions between 1869 and 1891.
In only three sessions did the same party control the House, the Senate, and the White House.
Wobbling in such shaky equilibrium, politicians tiptoed timidly, producing a political record that was often trivial and petty.
Few significant economic issues separated the major parties.
Democrats and Republicans saw very nearly eye-to-eye on questions like the tariff and civil-service reform, and majorities in both parties substantially agreed even on the much-debated currency question.
Yet despite their rough agreement on these national matters, the two parties were ferociously competitive with each other.
They were tightly and efficiently organized, and they commanded fierce loyalty from their members.
Voter turnouts reached heights unmatched before or since.
Nearly 80 percent of eligible voters cast their ballots in presidential elections in the three decades after the Civil War.
On election days droves of the party faithful tramped behind marching bands to the polling places, and ticket splitting, or failing to vote the straight party line, was as rare as a silver dollar.
How can this apparent paradox of political consensus and partisan fervor be explained?
The answer lies in the sharp ethnic and cultural differences in the membership of the two partiesin  distinctions of style and tone, and especially of religious sentiment.
Republican voters tended to adhere to those creeds that traced their lineage to Puritanism.
They stressed strict codes of personal morality and believed that government should play a role in regulating both the economic and the moral affairs of society.
Democrats, among whom immigrant Lutherans and Roman Catholics figured heavily, were more likely to adhere to faiths that took a less stern view of human weakness.
Their religions professed toleration of differences in an imperfect world, and they spurned government efforts to impose a single moral standard on the entire society.
These differences in temperament and religious values often produced raucous political contests at the local level, where issues like prohibition and education loomed large.
Democrats had a solid electoral base in the South and in the northern industrial cities, teeming with immigrants and controlled by well-oiled political machines.
Republican strength lay largely in the Midwest and the rural and small-town Northeast.
Grateful freedmen in the South continued to vote Republican in significant numbers.
Another important bloc of Republican ballots came from the members of the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR)a politically potent fraternal organization of several hundred thousand Union veterans of the Civil War.
The lifeblood of both parties was patronage disbursing jobs by the bucketful in return for votes, kickbacks, and party service.
Boisterous infighting over patronage beset the Republican party in the 1870s and 1880s.
A Stalwart faction, led by the handsome and imperious Roscoe (Lord Roscoe) Conkling, U.S.
senator from New York, unblushingly embraced the time-honored system of swapping civil-service jobs for votes.
Opposed to the Conklingites were the so-called Half-Breeds, who flirted coyly with civil-service reform, but whose real quarrel with the Stalwarts was over who should grasp the ladle that dished out the spoils.
The champion of the Half-Breeds was James G. Blaine of Maine, a radiantly personable congressman with an elastic conscience.
But despite the color of their personalities, Conkling and Blaine succeeded only in stalemating each other and deadlocking their party.
Hangers-on around Grant, like fleas urging their ailing dog to live, begged the Old Man to try for a third term in 1876.
The general, blind to his own ineptitudes, showed a disquieting willingness.
But the House, by a lopsided bipartisan vote of 233 to 18, derailed the third-term bandwagon.
It passed a resolution that sternly reminded the countryand Grantof the antidictator implications of the twoterm tradition.
With Grant out of the running and with the Conklingites and Blaineites neutralizing each other, the Republicans turned to a compromise candidate, Rutherford B. Hayes, who was obscure enough to be dubbed The Great Unknown.
His foremost qualification was the fact that he hailed from the electorally doubtful but potent state of Ohio, where he had served three terms as governor.
So crucial were the swing votes of Ohio in the cliffhanging presidential contests of the day that the state produced more than its share of presidential candidates.
A political saying of the 1870s paraphrased Shakespeare: Pitted against the humdrum Hayes was the Democratic nominee, Samuel J. Tilden, who had risen to fame as the man who bagged Boss Tweed in New York.
Campaigning against Republican scandal, Tilden racked up 184 electoral votes of the needed 185, with 20 votes in four statesthree of them in the Southdoubtful because of irregular returns (see the map below).
Surely Tilden could pick up at least one of these, especially in view of the fact that he had polled 247,448 more popular votes than Hayes, 4,284,020 to 4,036,572.
Both parties scurried to send visiting statesmen to the contested southern states of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida.
All three disputed states submitted two sets of returns, one Democratic and one Republican.
As the weeks drifted by, the paralysis tightened, generating a dramatic constitutional crisis.
The Constitution merely specifies that the electoral returns from the states shall be sent to Congress, and in the presence of the House and Senate, they shall be opened by the president of the Senate (see the Twelfth Amendment).
But who should count them?
On this point the Constitution was silent.
If counted by the president of the Senate (a Republican), the Republican returns would be C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 ; ; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; WASH.
TERR.
ORE.
2 1 CALIF.
6 NEV.
3 IDAHO TERR.
MONTANA TERR.
WYOMING TERR.
UTAH TERR.
COLO.
3 ARIZONA TERR.
INDIAN TERR.
DAKOTA TERR.
KANSAS 5 MICH.
11 N.Y.
35 MINN.
5 IOWA 11 NEBR.
3 MO.
15 ARK.
6 LA.
8 TEXAS 8 NEW MEXICO TERR.
MISS.
8 ALA.
10 GA.
11 FLA.
4 TENN.
12 N.C.
10 S.C.
7 VA.
11 W.VA.
5 PA.
29  OHIO 22 IND.
15 ILL.
21 WISC.
10 KY  12 ME.
7 N.H.
5 VT.
5 MASS.
13 R.I.
4 CONN.
6 N.J.
9 DEL.
3 MD.
8 ; HayesRepublican TidenDemocratic Disputed Hayes-Tilden Disputed Election of 1876 (with electoral vote by state) Nineteen of the twenty disputed votes composed the total electoral count of Louisiana, South Carolina, and Florida.
The twentieth was one of Oregons three votes, cast by an elector who turned out to be ineligible because he was a federal officeholder (a postmaster), contrary to the Constitution (see Art.
II, Sec.
I, para.
selected.
If counted by the Speaker of the House (a Democrat), the Democratic returns would be chosen.
How could the impasse be resolved?
Clash or compromise was the stark choice.
The danger loomed that there would be no president on Inauguration Day, March 4, 1877.
Tilden or Blood!
cried Democratic hotheads, and some of their Minute Men began to drill with arms.
But behind the scenes, frantically laboring statesmen gradually hammered out an agreement in the Henry Clay traditionthe Compromise of 1877.
The election deadlock itself was to be broken by the Electoral Count Act, which passed Congress early in 1877.
It set up an electoral commission consisting of fifteen men selected from the Senate, the House, and the Supreme Court.
In February 1877, about a month before Inauguration Day, the Senate and House met together in an electric atmosphere to settle the dispute.
The roll of the states was tolled off alphabetically.
When Florida was reachedthe first of the three southern states with two sets of returnsthe disputed documents were referred to the electoral commission, which sat in a nearby chamber.
After prolonged discussion the members agreed, by the partisan vote of eight Republicans to seven Democrats, to accept the Republican returns.
Outraged Democrats in Congress, smelling defeat, undertook to launch a filibuster until hell froze over.
Renewed deadlock was avoided by the rest of the complex Compromise of 1877, already partially concluded behind closed doors.
The Democrats reluctantly agreed that Hayes might take office in return for his withdrawing intimidating federal troops from the two states in which they remained, Louisiana and South Carolina.
Among various concessions, the Republicans assured the Democrats a place at the presidential patronage trough and support for a bill subsidizing the Texas and Pacific Railroads construction of a southern transcontinental line.
Not all of these promises were kept in later years, including the Texas and Pacific subsidy.
But the deal held together long enough to break the dangerous electoral standoff.
The Democrats permitted Hayes to receive the remainder of the disputed returnsall by the partisan vote of 8 to 7.
So close was the margin of safety that the explosive issue was settled only three days before the new president was officially sworn into office.
The nation breathed a collective sigh of relief.
The compromise bought peace at a price.
Violence was averted by sacrificing the black freedmen in the South.
With the Hayes-Tilden deal, the Republican party quietly abandoned its commitment to racial equality.
That commitment had been weakening in any case.
The Civil Rights Act of 1875 was in a sense the last feeble gasp of the congressional radical Republicans.
The act supposedly guaranteed equal accommodations in public places and prohibited racial discrimination in jury selection, but the law was born toothless and stayed that way for nearly a century.
The Supreme Court pronounced much of the act unconstitutional in the the Fourteenth Amendment prohibited only  rights by  by withdrawing the last federal troops that were propping up carpetbag governments.
The bayonetbacked Republican regimes collapsed as the blueclad soldiers departed.
The Democratic South speedily solidified and swiftly suppressed the now-friendless blacks.
Reconstruction, for better or worse, was officially ended.
Shamelessly relying on fraud and intimidation, white Democrats (Redeemers) resumed political power in the South and exercised it ruthSenate (Republican  majority) 3 3 House (Democratic  majority) 2 3 Supreme Court 3 2 TOTAL 8 7 lessly.
Blacks who tried to assert their rights faced unemployment, eviction, and physical harm.
Blacks (as well as poor whites) were forced into sharecropping and tenant farming.
Former slaves often found themselves at the mercy of former  masters who were now their landlords and creditors.
Through the crop-lien system, storekeepers extended credit to small farmers for food and supplies and in return took a lien on their harvests.
Shrewd merchants manipulated the system so that farmers remained perpetually in debt to them.
For generations to come, southern blacks were condemned to eke out a threadbare living under conditions scarcely better than slavery.
With white southerners back in the political saddle, daily discrimination against blacks grew increasingly oppressive.
What had started as the informal separation of blacks and whites in the immediate postwar years developed by the 1890s into systematic state-level legal codes of segregation C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 known as Jim Crow laws.
Southern states also enacted literacy requirements, voter-registration laws, and poll taxes to ensure full-scale disfranchisement of the Souths black population.
The Supreme Court validated the Souths segregationist social order in the case of  ruled that separate but equal facilities were constitutional under the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
But in reality the quality of African-American life was grotesquely unequal to that of whites.
Segregated in inferior schools and separated from whites in virtually all public facilities, including railroad cars, theaters, and even restrooms, blacks were assaulted daily by galling reminders of their secondclass citizenship.
To ensure the stability of this political and economic new order, southern whites dealt harshly with any black who dared to violate the Souths racial code of conduct.
A record number of blacks were lynched during the 1890s, most often for the crime of asserting themselves as equals (see the table below).
It would take a second Reconstruction, nearly a century later, to redress the racist imbalance of southern society.
The year 1877 marked more than the end of Reconstruction.
As the curtains officially closed on regional warfare, they opened on scenes of class warfare.
The explosive atmosphere was largely a byproduct of the long years of depression and deflation following the panic of 1873.
Railroad workers faced particularly hard times.
When the presidents of the nations four largest railroads collectively decided in 1877 to cut employees wages by 10 percent, the workers struck back.
President Hayess decision to call in federal troops to quell the unrest brought the striking laborers an outpouring of working-class support.
Work stoppages spread like wildfire in cities from Baltimore to St.
Louis.
When the battling between workers and soldiers ended after several weeks, over one hundred people were dead.
The failure of the great railroad strike exposed the weakness of the labor movement.
Racial and ethnic fissures among workers everywhere fractured labor unity and were particularly acute between the Irish and the Chinese in California (see Makers of America: The Chinese, pp.
512513).
By 1880 the Golden State counted seventy-five thousand Asian newcomers, about 9 percent of its entire population.
Mostly poor, uneducated, single males, they derived predominantly from the Taishan district of Kuangtung (Guangdong) province in southern China.
They had originally come to America to dig in the goldfields and to sledgehammer the tracks of the transcontinental railroads across the West.
When the gold supply petered out and the tracks were laid, manyperhaps half of those who arrived before the 1880sreturned home to China with their meager savings.
Those who remained in America faced extraordinary hardships.
They worked at the most menial jobs, often as cooks, laundrymen, or domestic  servants.
Without women or families, they were marooned in a land where they neither were wanted nor wanted to be.
They lived lonely lives, bereft of the children who in other immigrant communities eased their parents assimilation through their exposure to the English language and American customs in school.
The phrase not a Chinamans chance emerged in this era to describe the daunting odds against which they struggled.
In San Francisco Irish-born demagogue Denis Kearney incited his followers to violent abuse of the 1882 64 49 113 1885 110 74 184 1890 11 85 96 1895 66 113 179 1900 9 106 115 1905 5 57 62 1910 9 67 76 1915 13 56 69 1920 8 53 61 1925 0 17 17 1930 1 20 21 1935 2 18 20 1940 1 4 5 1945 0 1 1 1950 1 1 2 1965 0 0 0 *There were no lynchings in 19651970.
In every year from 1882 (when records were first kept) to 1964, the number of lynchings corresponded roughly to the figures given here.
The worst year was 1892, when 161 blacks and 69 whites were lynched (total 230); the next worst was 1884, when 164 whites and 51 blacks were lynched (total 215).
n the late nineteenth century, the burgeoning industries and booming frontier towns of the United States Pacific coast hungered for laborers to wrench minerals from stubborn rock, to lay down railroad track through untamed wastelands, and to transform dry expanses into fertile fields of fruit and vegetables.
In faraway Asia the Chinese answered the call.
Contributing their muscle to the building of the West, they dug in the gold mines and helped to lay the transcontinental railroads that stitched together the American nation.
The first Chinese had arrived in Spanish America as early as 1565.
But few followed those earliest pioneers until the 1848 discovery of gold in California attracted people from all over the world to Americas Pacific coast.
Among them were many fortune-hungry Chinese who sailed into San Francisco, which Chinese immigrants named the golden mountain.
The California boom coincided with the culmination of years of tumult and suffering in China.
The once great Chinese Empire was disintegrating, while a few ruthless landlords, like looters, grabbed control of nearly every acre of farmland.
In destructive complement to this internal disarray, the European imperial powers forced their way into the unstable country, seeking to unlock the riches of  a nation that had been closed to outsiders for  centuries.
Faced with economic hardship and political turmoil, more than 2 million Chinese left their homeland between 1840 and 1900, for destinations as diverse as Southeast Asia, Peru, Hawaii, and Cuba, with more than 300,000 entering the United States.
Although their numbers included a few merchants and artisans, most were unskilled country folk.
In some cases families pooled their money to send out a son, but most travelers, desperately poor, obtained their passage through Chinese middlemen, who advanced them ship fare in return for the emigrants promise to work off their debts after they landed.
This contracting sometimes led to conditions so cruel that the practice was ignominiously called pig selling.
The Chinese-America of the late-nineteenthcentury West was overwhelmingly a bachelor society.
Women of good repute rarely made the passage.
Of the very few Chinese women who ventured to California at this time, most became prostitutes.
Many of them had been deceived by the false promise of honest jobs.
Although a stream of workers returned to their homeland, many Chinese stayed.
Chinatowns sprang up wherever economic opportunities presented themselvesin railroad towns, farming villages, and cities.
Chinese in these settlements spoke their own language, enjoyed the fellowship of their own compatriots, and sought safety from prejudice and violence, never rare in American society.
Many immigrant clubs, American adaptations of Chinese traditions of loyalty to clan or region, were established in these communities.
Rivaling such clubs and associations were the secret societies known as tongs.
The word  acquired a sinister reputation among non-Chinese, for the tongs counted the poorest and shadiest immigrants among their members.
These were people without ties to a clan, those individuals most alienated from traditional Chinese organizations and from American society as well.
After 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act barred nearly all Chinese from the United States for six decades.
Many of the bachelors who had made the long journey to America died or returned home.
Slowly, however, those men and the few women who remained raised families and reared a new generation of Chinese Americans.
Like their immigrant  parents, this second generation suffered from discrimination.
They had to eke out a living in jobs despised by Caucasian laborers or take daunting risks in small entrepreneurial ventures.
Yet many hard-working Chinese did manage to open their own restaurants, laundries, and other small businesses.
The enterprises formed a solid economic foundation for their small community and remain a source of livelihood for many Chinese-Americans even today.
1850 4,018     1860 34,933 19  41,397 1870 63,199 13 1 64,301 1880 105,465 21 1 123,201 1890 107,488 27 3 61,711 1900 89,863 19 10 14,799 *Includes Chinese immigrants in Hawaii after 1898.
Estimated.
hapless Chinese.
The Kearneyites, many of whom were recently arrived immigrants from Europe, hotly resented the competition of cheap labor from the still more recently arrived Chinese.
The beefeater, they claimed, had no chance against the riceeater in a life-and-death struggle for jobs and wages.
The present tens of thousands of Chinese coolies were regarded as a menace, the prospective millions as a calamity.
Taking to the streets, gangs of Kearneyites terrorized the Chinese by shearing off their precious pigtails.
Some victims were murdered  outright.
Congress finally slammed the door on Chinese immigrant laborers when it passed the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882, prohibiting all further immigration from China.
The door stayed shut until 1943.
Some exclusionists even tried to strip native-born Chinese-Americans of their citizenship, but the Supreme Court ruled in  1898 that the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed citizenship to all persons born in the United States.
This doctrine of birthright citizenship (or  the right of the soil, as contrasted with  on the parents nationality) provided important protections to Chinese-Americans as well as to other immigrant communities.
As the presidential campaign of 1880 approached, Rutherfraud Hayes was a man without a party, denounced and repudiated by the Republican Old Guard.
The Republican party sought a new standardbearer for 1880 and finally settled on a dark-horse candidate, James A. Garfield, from the electorally powerful state of Ohio.
His vice-presidential running mate was a notorious Stalwart henchman, Chester A. Arthur of New York.
Energetically waving the bloody shirt, Garfield barely squeaked out a victory over the Democratic candidate and Civil War hero, Winfield Scott Hancock.
He polled only 39,213 more votes than Hancock4,453,295 to 4,414,082but his margin in the electoral column was a comfortable 214 to 155.
The new president was energetic and able, but he was immediately ensnared in a political conflict between his secretary of state, James G. Blaine, and Blaines Stalwart nemesis, Senator Roscoe Conkling.
Then, as the Republican factions dueled, tragedy struck.
A disappointed and mentally deranged office seeker, Charles J. Guiteau, shot President Garfield in the back in a Washington railroad station.
Garfield lingered in agony for eleven weeks and died on September 19, 1881.
Guiteau, when seized, reportedly cried, I am a Stalwart.
Arthur is now President of the United States.
The implication was that now the Conklingites would all get good jobs.
Guiteaus attorneys argued that he was not guilty because of his incapacity to distinguish right from wrongan early instance of the insanity defense.
The defendant himself demonstrated his weak grip on reality when he asked all those who had benefited politically by the assassination to contribute to his defense fund.
These tactics availed little.
Guiteau was found guilty of murder and hanged.
C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 Garfields death had one positive outcome: it shocked politicians into reforming the shameful spoils system.
The unlikely instrument of reform was Chester Arthur.
Observers at first underestimated him.
His record of cronyism and his fondness for fine wines and elegant clothing (including eighty pairs of trousers) suggested that he was little more than a foppish dandy.
But Arthur surprised his critics by prosecuting several fraud cases and giving his former Stalwart pals the cold shoulder.
Disgust with Garfields murder gave the Republican party itself a previously undetected taste for reform.
The medicine finally applied to the longsuffering federal government was the Pendleton Act of 1883the so-called Magna Carta of civil-service reform.
It made compulsory campaign contributions from federal employees illegal, and it established the Civil Service Commission to make appointments to federal jobs on the basis of competitive examinations rather than pull.
Although at first covering only about 10 percent of federal jobs, civil-service reform did rein in the most blatant abuses.
Yet like many well-intentioned reforms, it bred unintended problems of its own.
With the plum federal posts now beyond their tending to degrade American politics.
The men who are in office only for what they can make out of it are thoroughly unwholesome citizens, and their activity in politics is simply noxious.
Decent private citizens must inevitably be driven out of politics if it is suffered to become a mere selfish scramble for plunder, where victory rests with the most greedy, the most cunning, the most brazen.
The whole patronage system is inimical to American institutions; it forms one of the gravest problems with which democratic and republican government has to grapple.
[The reformers] vocation and ministry is to lament the sins of other people.
Their stock in trade is rancid, canting self-righteousness.
They are wolves in sheeps clothing.
Their real object is office and plunder.
When Dr.
Johnson defined patriotism as the last refuge of a scoundrel, he was unconscious of the then undeveloped capabilities and uses of the word Reform.
reach, politicians were forced to look elsewhere for money, the mothers milk of politics.
Increasingly, they turned to the bulging coffers of the big corporations.
A new breed of boss emergedless skilled at mobilizing small armies of immigrants and other voters on election day, but more adept at milking dollars from manufacturers and lobbyists.
The Pendleton Act partially divorced politics from patronage, but it helped drive politicians into marriages of convenience with big-business leaders.
President Arthurs surprising display of integrity offended too many powerful Republicans.
His ungrateful party turned him out to pasture, and in 1886 he died of a cerebral hemorrhage.
James G. Blaines persistence in pursuit of his partys presidential nomination finally paid off in 1884.
The dashing Maine politician, blessed with almost every political asset except a reputation for honesty, was the clear choice of the Republican convention in Chicago.
But many reform-minded Republicans gagged on Blaines candidacy.
Blaines enemies publicized the fishy-smelling Mulligan letters, written by Blaine to a Boston businessman and linking the powerful politician to a corrupt deal involving federal favors to a southern railroad.
At least one of the damning documents ended with the furtive warning Burn this letter.
Some reformers, unable to swallow Blaine, bolted to the Democrats.
They were sneeringly dubbed Mugwumps, a word of Indian derivation meant to suggest that they were sanctimonious or holier-than-thou.
* Victory-starved Democrats turned enthusiastically to a noted reformer, Grover Cleveland.
A burly bachelor with a soup-straining mustache and a taste for chewing tobacco, Cleveland was a solid but not brilliant lawyer of forty-seven.
He had rocketed from the mayors office in Buffalo to the governorship of New York and the presidential nomination in three short years.
Known as Grover the Good he enjoyed a well-deserved reputation for probity in office.
But Clevelands admirers soon got a shock.
Resolute Republicans, digging for dirt in the past of bachelor Cleveland, unearthed the report that he had been involved in an amorous affair with a Buffalo widow.
She had an illegitimate son, now eight years old, for whom Cleveland had made financial provision.
Democratic elders were demoralized.
They hurried to Cleveland and urged him to lie like a gentleman, but their ruggedly honest candidate insisted, Tell the truth.
C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 13,780 offices out of 131,208 106,205 offices out of 256,000 497,603 offices out of 691,116 662,832 offices out of 920,310 2,278,446 offices out of 2,603,267 2,393,000 offices out of 2,645,000 1,694,000 offices out of 2,940,000  PRESIDENT ARTHUR 1884 McKINLEY 1901 WILSON 1920 ROOSEVELT 1939 TRUMAN 1952 NIXON 1970 BUSH 1990 10% 41% 71% 72% 87% 90% 1,351,072 offices out of 2,734,338 CLINTON 2000 49% 57% Growth of Classified Civil Service (subject to competitive requirements) The most recent numbers reflect the changes mandated by the Postal Reorganization Act of 1971, which  moved U.S.
Postal Service employees from competitive to excepted service.
*Latter-day punsters gibed that the Mugwumps were priggish politicians who sat on the fence with their mugs on one side and their wumps on the other.
The campaign of 1884 sank to perhaps the lowest level in American experience, as the two parties grunted and shoved for the hog trough of office.
Few fundamental differences separated them.
Even the bloody shirt had faded to a pale pink.
* Personalities, not principles, claimed the headlines.
Crowds of Democrats surged through city streets, chanting to the rhythm of left, left, left, right, leftBurn, burn, burn this letter!
Republicans taunted in return, Ma, ma, wheres my pa?
Defiant Democrats shouted back, Gone to the White House, ha, ha, ha!
The contest hinged on the state of New York, where Blaine blundered badly in the closing days  of the campaign.
A witless Republican clergyman damned the Democrats in a speech as the party of Rum, Romanism, and Rebellioninsulting with one swift stroke the race, the faith, and the patriotism of New Yorks numerous Irish-American voters.
Blaine was present at the time but lacked the presence of mind to repudiate the statement immediately.
The pungent phrase, shortened to RRR, stung and stuck.
Blaines silence seemed to give assent, and the wavering Irishmen who deserted his camp helped account for Clevelands paper-thin plurality of about a thousand votes in New York State, enough to give him the presidency.
Cleveland swept the solid South and squeaked into office with 219 to 182 electoral votes and 4,879,507 to 4,850,93 popular votes.
*Neither candidate had served in the Civil War.
Cleveland had hired a substitute to go in his stead while he supported his widowed mother and two sisters.
Blaine was the only Republican presidential candidate from Grant through McKinley (1868 to 1900) who had not been a Civil War officer.
Bull-necked Cleveland in 1885 was the first Democrat to take the oath of presidential office since Buchanan, twenty-eight years earlier.
Huge question marks hung over his ample frame (5 feet 11 inches, 250 pounds).
Could the party of disunion be trusted to govern the Union?
Would desperate Democrats, ravenously hungry after twenty-four years of exile, trample the frail sprouts of civil-service reform in a stampede to the patronage trough?
Could Cleveland restore a measure of respect and power to the maligned and enfeebled presidency?
Cleveland was a man of principles, most of them safely orthodox by the standards of his day.
A staunch apostle of the hands-off creed of laissezfaire, the new president caused the hearts of businesspeople and bankers to throb with contentment.
He summed up his political philosophy in 1887 when he vetoed a bill to provide seeds for droughtravaged Texas farmers.
Though the people support the government, he declared, the government should not support the people.
As tactless as a mirror and as direct as a bulldozer, he was outspoken, unbending, and profanely hot-tempered.
At the outset Cleveland narrowed the NorthSouth chasm by naming to his cabinet two former Confederates.
As for the civil service, Cleveland was whipsawed between the demands of the Democratic faithful for jobs and the demands of the Mugwumps, who had helped elect him, for reform.
Believing in the merit system, Cleveland at first favored the cause of the reformers, but he eventually caved in to the carpings of Democratic bosses and fired almost two-thirds of the 120,000 federal employees, including 40,000 incumbent (Republican) postmasters, to make room for deserving Democrats.
Military pensions gave Cleveland some of his most painful political headaches.
The politically powerful Grand Army of the Republic (GAR) routinely lobbied hundreds of private pension bills through a compliant Congress.
Benefits were granted to deserters, to bounty jumpers, to men who never served, and to former soldiers who in later years had incurred disabilities in no way connected with war service.
A Democrat and a nonveteran, Cleveland was in an awkward position when  it came to fighting the pension-grabbers.
But the conscience-driven president read each bill carefully, vetoed several hundred of them, and then laboriously penned individual veto messages for Congress.
Cleveland also risked his political neck by prodding the hornets nest of the tariff issue.
During the Civil War, tariff schedules had been jacked up to new C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 WASH.
TERR.
ORE.
3 CALIF.
8 NEV.
3 IDAHO TERR.
MONTANA TERR.
WYOMING TERR.
UTAH TERR.
COLO.
3 ARIZONA TERR.
INDIAN TERR.
DAKOTA TERR.
KANSAS 9 MICH.
13 N.Y.
36 MINN.
7 IOWA 13 NEBR.
5 MO.
16 ARK.
7 LA.
8 TEXAS 13 NEW MEXICO TERR.
MISS.
9 ALA.
10 GA.
12 FLA.
4 TENN.
12 N.C.
11 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W.VA.
6 PA.
30 OHIO 23 IND.
15 ILL.
22 WISC.
11 KY  13 ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
14 R.I.
4 CONN.
6 N.J.
9 DEL.
3 MD.
8 ClevelandDemocratic BlaineRepublican Presidential Election of 1884 (with electoral vote by state) high levels, partly to raise revenues for the insatiable military machine.
American industry, which was preponderantly in Republican hands, had profited from this protection and hated to see the sheltering benefits reduced in peacetime.
But the high duties continued to pile up revenue at the customshouses, and by 1881 the Treasury was running an annual surplus amounting to an embarrassing $145 million.
Most of the governments income, in those preincome tax days, came from the tariff.
Congress could reduce the vexatious surplus in two ways.
One was to squander it on pensions and pork-barrel bills and thus curry favor with veterans and other self-seeking groups.
The other was to lower the tariffsomething the big industrialists vehemently opposed.
Grover Cleveland, the rustic Buffalo attorney, had known little and cared less about the tariff before entering the White House.
But as he studied the subject, he was much impressed by the arguments for downward revision of the tariff schedules.
Lower barriers would mean lower prices for consumers and less protection for monopolies.
Most important, they would mean an end to the Treasury surplus, a standing mockery of Clevelands professed belief in fiscal orthodoxy and small-government frugality.
After much hesitation Cleveland saw his duty and overdid it.
With his characteristic bluntness, Cleveland tossed an appeal for lower tariffs like a bombshell into the lap of Congress in late 1887.
The response was electric.
Cleveland succeeded admirably in smoking the issue out into the open.
Democrats were deeply depressed at the obstinacy of their chief.
Republicans rejoiced at his apparent recklessness.
The old warrior Blaine gloated, Theres one more President for us in [tariff ] protection.
For the first time in years, a real issue divided the two parties as the 1888 presidential election loomed.
Dismayed Democrats, seeing no alternative, somewhat dejectedly nominated Grover Cleveland in their St.
Louis convention.
Eager Republicans turned to Benjamin Harrison, whose grandfather was former president William Henry (Tippecanoe) Harrison.
The tariff was the prime issue.
The two parties flooded the country with some 10 million pamphlets on the subject.
The specter of a lowered tariff spurred the Republicans to frantic action.
In an impressive demonstration of the postPendleton Act politics of alliances with big business, they raised a war chest of some $3 millionthe heftiest yetlargely by frying the fat out of nervous industrialists.
The money was widely used to line up corrupt voting cattle known as repeaters and floaters.
In Indiana, always a crucial swing state, votes were shamelessly purchased for as much as $20 each.
On election day Harrison nosed out Cleveland, 233 to 168 electoral votes.
A change of about 7,000 ballots in New York would have reversed the outcome.
Cleveland actually polled more popular votes, 5,537,857 to 5,447,129, but he nevertheless became the first sitting president to be voted out of his chair since Martin Van Buren in 1840.
After a four-year famine, the Republicans under Harrison licked their lips hungrily for the bounty of federal offices.
They yearned to lavish upon the party faithful the fat surpluses produced by the high tariffs.
But in the House of Representatives, they had only three more votes than the necessary quorum of 163 members, and the Democrats were preparing to obstruct all House business by refusing to answer roll calls, demanding roll calls to determine the presence of a quorum, and employing other delaying tactics.
Into this tense cockpit stepped the new Republican Speaker of the House, Thomas B. Reed of Maine.
A hulking figure who towered six feet three inches, he was renowned as a master debater.
He spoke with a harsh nasal drawl and wielded a verbal harpoon of sarcasm.
To one congressman who quoted Henry Clay that he would rather be right than be president, Reed caustically retorted that he would never be either.
Opponents cringed at the crack of his quip.
Reed soon bent the intimidated House to his imperious will.
He counted as present Democrats who had not answered the roll and who, rule book in hand, furiously denied that they were legally there.
By such tactics Czar Reed utterly dominated the Billion-Dollar Congressthe first in history to C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 Down in the cornfield Hear that mournful sound; All the Democrats are weeping Grovers in the cold, cold ground!
appropriate that sum.
Congress showered pensions on Civil War veterans and increased government purchases of silver.
To keep the revenues flowing inand to protect Republican industrialists from foreign competitionthe Billion-Dollar Congress also passed the McKinley Tariff Act of 1890, boosting rates to their highest peacetime level ever (an average of 48.4 percent on dutiable goods).
Sponsored in the House by rising Republican star William McKinley of Ohio, the new tariff act brought fresh woes to farmers.
Debt-burdened farmers had no choice but to buy manufactured goods from high-priced protected American industrialists, but were compelled to sell their own agricultural products into highly competitive, unprotected world markets.
Mounting discontent against the McKinley Tariff caused many rural voters to rise in wrath.
In the congressional elections of 1890, the Republicans lost their precarious majority and were reduced to just 88 seats, as compared with 235 Democrats.
Even the much-touted McKinley went down to defeat.
Ominously for conservatives, the new Congress also included nine members of the Farmers Alliance, a militant organization of southern and western farmers.
Politics was no longer as usual in 1892, when the newly formed Peoples Party, or Populists, burst upon the scene.
Rooted in the Farmers Alliance of frustrated farmers in the great agricultural belts of the West and South, the Populists met in Omaha and adopted a scorching platform that denounced the prolific womb of governmental injustice.
They demanded inflation through free and unlimited coinage of silver at the rate of sixteen ounces of silver to one ounce of gold.
They further called for a graduated income tax; government ownership of the railroads, telegraph, and telephone; the direct election of U.S.
senators; a one-term limit on the presidency; the adoption of the initiative and referendum to allow citizens to shape legislation more directly; a shorter workday; and immigration restriction.
As their presidential candidate, the Populists uproariously nominated the eloquent old Greenbacker, General James B. Weaver.
An epidemic of nationwide strikes in the summer of 1892 raised the prospect that the Populists could weld together a coalition of aggrieved workers and indebted farmers in a revolutionary joint assault on the capitalist order.
At Andrew Carnegies Homestead steel plant near Pittsburgh, company officials called in three hundred armed Pinkerton detectives in July to crush a strike by steelworkers angry over pay cuts.
Defiant strikers, armed with rifles and dynamite, forced their assailants to surrender after a vicious battle that left ten people dead and some sixty wounded.
Troops were eventually summoned, and both the strike and the union were broken.
That same month, federal troops bloodily smashed a strike among silver miners in Idahos fabled Coeur dAlene district.
The Populists made a remarkable showing in the 1892 presidential election.
Singing Good-by, Party Bosses, they rolled up 1,029,846 popular votes and 22 electoral votes for General Weaver.
They thus became one of the few third parties in U.S.
history to break into the electoral column.
But they fell far short of an electoral majority.
Industrial laborers, especially in the urban East, did not rally to the Populist banner in appreciable numbers.
Populist electoral votes came from only six midwestern and western states, four of which (Kansas, Colorado, Idaho, and Nevada) fell completely into the Populist basket.
The South, although a hotbed of agrarian agitation, proved especially unwilling to throw in its lot with the new party.
Race was the reason.
The more than one million southern black farmers organized in the Colored Farmers National Alliance shared a host of complaints with poor white farmers, and for a time their common economic goals promised to overcome their racial differences.
Recognizing the crucial edge that black votes could give them in the South, Populist leaders like Georgias Tom Watson reached out to the black community.
Watson was a wiry redhead who could talk like the thrust of a Bowie knife.
He declared, There is no reason why the black man should not understand that the law that hurts me, as a farmer, hurts him, as a farmer.
Many blacks were disillusioned enough with the Republican party to respond.
Alarmed, the conservative white Bourbon elite in the South played cynically upon historic racial antagonisms to counter the Populists appeal for interracial solidarity and woo back poor whites.
Southern blacks were heavy losers.
The Populist-inspired reminder of potential black political strength led to the near-total extinction of what little C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 I once was a tool of oppression, And as green as a sucker could be, And monopolies banded together To beat a poor hayseed like me.
African-American suffrage remained in the South.
White southerners more aggressively than ever used literacy tests and poll taxes to deny blacks the ballot.
The notorious grandfather clause exempted from those requirements anyone whose forebear had voted in 1860when, of course, black slaves had not voted at all.
More than half a century would pass before southern blacks could again vote in considerable numbers.
Accompanying this disfranchisement were more severe Jim Crow laws, ClevelandDemocratic HarrisonRepublican WeaverPopulist No returns, unsettled, etc.
Presidential Election of 1892 (showing vote by county) Note the concentration of Populist strength in the semiarid farming regions of the western half of  the country.
(Compare this with the annual precipitation map on p.
606).
designed to enforce racial segregation in public places, including hotels and restaurants, and backed up by atrocious lynchings and other forms of intimidation.
The conservative crusade to eliminate the black vote also had dire consequences for the Populist party itself.
Even Tom Watson abandoned his interracial appeals and, in time, became a vociferous racist himself.
After 1896 the Populist party lapsed increasingly into vile racism and staunchly advocated black disfranchisement.
Such were the bitterly ironic fruits of the Populist campaign in the South.
With the Populists divided and the Republicans discredited, Grover Cleveland took office once again in 1893, the only president ever reelected after defeat.
He was the same old bull-necked and bull-headed Cleveland, with a little more weight, polish, conservatism, and self-assertiveness.
But though it was the same old Cleveland, it was not the same old country.
Debtors were up in arms, workers were restless, and the advance shadows of panic were falling.
Hardly had Cleveland seated himself in the presidential chair when the devastating depression of 1893 burst about his burly frame.
Lasting for about four years, it was the most punishing economic downturn of the nineteenth century.
Contributing causes were the splurge of overbuilding and speculation, labor disorders, and the ongoing agricultural depression.
Free-silver agitation had also damaged American credit abroad, and the usual pinch on American finances had come when European banking houses began to call in loans from the United States.
Distress ran deep and far.
About eight thousand American businesses collapsed in six months.
Dozens of railroad lines went into the hands of receivers.
Soup kitchens fed the unemployed, while gangs of hoboes (tramps) wandered aimlessly about the country.
Local charities did their feeble best, but the federal government, bound by the letnature-take-its-course philosophy of the times, saw no legitimate way to relieve the suffering masses.
Cleveland, who had earlier been bothered by  a surplus, was now burdened with a deepening deficit.
The Treasury was required to issue legal tender notes for the silver bullion that it bought.
Owners of the paper currency would then present it for gold, and by law the notes had to be reissued.
New holders would repeat the process, thus draining away precious gold in an endless-chain operation.
Alarmingly, the gold reserve in the Treasury dropped below $100 million, which was popularly regarded as the safe minimum for supporting about C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 $350 million in outstanding paper money.
Cleveland saw no alternative but to halt the bleeding away of gold by engineering a repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890.
For this purpose he summoned Congress into an extra session in the summer of 1893.
Unknown to the country, complications threatened from another quarter.
A malignant growth had developed on the roof of Clevelands mouth, and it had to be removed on a private yacht with extreme secrecy.
If the president had died under the surgeons knife, his place would have been taken by the soft-money vice president, Adlai E. Stevenson an eventuality that would have deepened the crisis.
In Congress the debate over the repeal of the silver act was meanwhile running its heated course.
A silver-tongued young Democratic congressman from Nebraska, thirty-three-year-old William Jennings Bryan, held the galleries spellbound for three hours as he championed the cause of free silver.
The friends of silver announced that hell would freeze over before Congress would pass the repeal measure.
But an angered Cleveland used his jobgranting power to break the filibuster in the Senate.
He thus alienated the Democratic silverites like Bryan and disrupted his party at the very outset of his administration.
Repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act only partially stopped the hemorrhaging of gold from the Treasury.
In February 1894 the gold reserve sank to a dismaying $41 million.
The United States was now in grave danger of going off the gold standarda move that would render the nations currency volatile and unreliable as a measure of value and that would also mortally cripple Americas international trade.
Cleveland floated two Treasury bond issues in 1894, totaling over $100 million, but the endless-chain operations continued relentlessly.
Early in 1895 Cleveland turned in desperation to J. P. Morgan, the bankers banker and the head of a Wall Street syndicate.
After tense negotiations at the White House, the bankers agreed to lend the government $65 million in gold.
They were obviously in business for profit, so they charged a commission amounting to about $7 million.
But they did make a significant concession when they agreed to obtain one-half of the gold abroad and take the necessary steps to dam it up in the leaky Treasury.
The loan, at least temporarily, helped restore confidence in the nations finances.
The bond deal stirred up a storm.
The Wall Street ogre, especially in the eyes of the silverites and other debtors, symbolized all that was wicked and grasping in American politics.
President Clevelands secretive dealings with the mighty Jupiter Morgan were savagely condemned as a sellout of the national government.
But Cleveland was certain that he had done no wrong.
Sarcastically denying that he was Morgans errand boy, Cleveland asserted, Without shame and without repentance I confess my share of the guilt.
Cleveland suffered further embarrassment with the passage of the Wilson-Gorman Tariff in 1894.
The Democrats had pledged to lower tariffs, but by the time their tariff bill made it through Congress, it had been so loaded with special-interest protection that it made scarcely a dent in the high McKinley Tariff rates.
An outraged Cleveland grudgingly allowed the bill, which also contained a 2 percent tax on incomes over $4,000, to become law without his signature.
When the Supreme Court struck down the income-tax provision in 1895,* the Populists and other disaffected groups found proof that the courts were only the tools of the plutocrats.
Democratic political fortunes naturally suffered in the face of these several setbacks.
The tariff dynamite that had blasted the Republicans out of the House in 1890 now dislodged the Democrats, with a strong helping hand from the depression.
The revitalized Republicans, singing Times Are Mighty Hard, won the congressional elections of 1894 in a landslide244 seats to 105 for the Democrats.
The Republicans began to look forward to the presidential race of 1896 with unconcealed glee.
Despite his gruff integrity and occasional courage, Grover Cleveland failed utterly to cope with the serious economic crisis that befell the country in 1893.
He was tied down in office by the same threads that held all the politicians of the day to Lilliputian levels.
Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Arthur, Harrison, and Cleveland are often referred to as the *It violated the direct tax clause.
See Art.
I, Sec.
IX, para.
4 in the Appendix.
The Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1913, permitted an income tax.
forgettable presidents.
Bewhiskered and bland in person, they left mostly blanksor blotson the nations political record, as issues like the tariff, the money question, and the rights of labor continued to fester.
What little political vitality existed in Gilded Age America was to be found in local settings or in Congress, which overshadowed the White House for most of this period.
But before the century ended, down-and-out debtors and disgruntled workers would make one last titanic effort to wring reform out of the political systemin the momentous election of 1896.
C HAPTER 23 Political Paralysis in the Gilded Age, 18691896 Grant defeats Seymour for the presidency Fisk and Gould corner the gold market Tweed scandal in New York Crdit Mobilier scandal exposed Liberal Republicans break with Grant Grant defeats Greeley for the presidency Panic of 1873 Whiskey Ring scandal Civil Rights Act of 1875 Resumption Act passed Hayes-Tilden election standoff and crisis Compromise of 1877 Reconstruction ends  Railroad strikes paralyze nation Garfield defeats Hancock for presidency Garfield assassinated; Arthur assumes  presidency Chinese Exclusion Act Pendleton Act sets up Civil Service  Commission Cleveland defeats Blaine for presidency Harrison defeats Cleveland for presidency Thomas B. Czar Reed becomes Speaker of  the House of Representatives Billion-Dollar Congress McKinley Tariff Act Sherman Silver Purchase Act (repealed 1893) Homestead steel strike Coeur dAlene (Idaho) silver miners strike Peoples party candidate James B. Weaver wins  twenty-two electoral votes Cleveland defeats Harrison and Weaver to regain presidency Depression of 1893 begins Wilson-Gorman Tariff (contains income-tax  provision, declared unconstitutional 1895) Republicans regain House of Representatives J. P. Morgans banking syndicate loans $65 million in gold to federal government equal doctrine aking their cue from contemporary satirical commentaries like Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warners  ans who wrote about the postCivil War era judged it harshly.
They condemned its politicians as petty and corrupt, lamented the emergence of a new plutocratic class, and railed against the arrogance of corporate power.
Such a view is conspicuous in Charles and Mary Beards  ential American history textbook ever written.
It is equally evident in Vernon Louis Parringtons classic literary history,  (3 vols., 19271930), in which the entire postCivil War period is contemptuously dismissed as the time of the great barbecue.
The Beards and Parrington were leaders of the so-called progressive school of historical writing that flourished in the early years of the twentieth century.
Progressive historians, many of whom grew up in the Gilded Age, shared in a widespread disillusionment that the Civil War had failed to generate a rebirth of American idealism.
Their political sympathies were chillingly antibusiness and warmly prolabor, pro-farmer, and pro-reform.
Historians of the progressive persuasion identified Populism as virtually the only organized opposition to the social, economic, and political order that took shape in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
The Populists thus became heroes to several generations of writers who bemoaned that order and looked back longingly at Americans agrarian past.
John D. Hicks,  (1931), is the classic portrayal of the Populists as embattled farmers hurling defiance at Wall Street and the robber barons in a last-ditch defense of their simple, honest way of life.
Bowed but unbroken by the defeat of their great champion, William Jennings Bryan, in the presidential election of 1896, the Populists, Hicks claimed, left a reforming legacy that flourished again in the progressive era and the New Deal.
Hickss point of view was the dominant one until the 1950s, when it was sharply criticized  by Richard Hofstadter in  Hofstadter charged that the progressive historians had romanticized the Populists, who were best understood not as picturesque protesters, but as harassed little country businessmen bristling with provincial prejudices.
The city-born-and-bred Hofstadter argued that the Populist revolt was aimed not just at big business and the money power  but also somewhat irrationally at urbanism, immigrants, the East, and modernity itself.
Hofstadter thus exposed a dark side of Populism, which contained elements of backwoods anti-intellectualism, paranoia, and even anti-Semitism.
In the 1960s several scholars, inspired by the work of C. Vann Woodward, as well as by sympathy with the protest movements of that turbulent decade, began to rehabilitate the Populists as authentic reformers with genuine grievances.
Especially notable in this vein was Lawrence Goodwyns reasonable radicals who were justifiably resentful of their eclipse by urban industrialism and finance capitalism.
He also portrayed Populism as the last gasp of popular political participation, a democratic moment in American history that expired with the Populists absorption into the Democratic party.
Two subsequent works, Edward L. Ayerss McMaths   many of the older perspectives and presented a balanced view of the Populists as radical in many ways but also limited by their nostalgia for a lost agrarian past.
For further reading, see page A16 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Industry Comes of Age  18651900 H ENRY G EORGE , 1879 A s the nineteenth century drew to a close, observers were asking, Why are the best men not in politics?
One answer was that they were being lured away from public life by the lusty attractions of the booming private economy.
As Americas Industrial Revolution slipped into high gear, talented men ached for profits, not the presidency.
They dreamed of controlling corporations, not the Congress.
What the nation lost in civic leadership, it gained in an astounding surge of economic growth.
Although in many ways still a political dwarf, the United States was about to stand up before the world as an industrial colossusand the lives of millions of working Americans would be transformed in the process.
The government-business entanglements that increasingly shaped politics after the Civil War also undergirded the industrial development of the nation.
The unparalleled outburst of railroad construction was a crucial case.
When Lincoln was shot in 1865, there were only 35,000 miles of steam railways in the United States, mostly east of the Mississippi.
By 1900 the figure had spurted up to 192,556 miles, or more than that for all of Europe combined, and much of the new trackage ran west of the Mississippi.
Transcontinental railroad building was so costly and risky as to require government subsidies.
The extension of rails into thinly populated regions was unprofitable until the areas could be built up; and private promoters were unwilling to suffer heavy initial losses.
Congress, impressed by arguments pleading military and postal needs, began to advance liberal money loans to two favored cross-continent companies in 1862 and added enormous donations of acreage paralleling the tracks.
All told, Washington rewarded the railroads with 155,504,994 acres, and the western states contributed 49 million morea total area larger than Texas.
Grasping railroads tied up even more land than this for a number of years.
Land grants to railroads were made in broad belts along the proposed route.
Within these belts the railroads were allowed to choose   board fashion (see the map above).
But until they determined the precise location of their tracks and decided which sections were the choicest selections, the railroads withheld  users.
President Grover Cleveland put an end to this foot-dragging practice in 1887 and threw open to settlement the still-unclaimed public portions of the land-grant areas.
Noisy criticism, especially in later years, was leveled at the giveaway of so valuable a birthright to greedy corporations.
But the government did receive beneficial returns, including long-term preferential rates for postal service and military traffic.
Granting land was also a cheap way to subsidize a much-desired transportation system, because it avoided new taxes for direct cash grants.
The railroads could turn the land into gold by using it as collateral for loans from private bankers or, later, by selling it.
This they often did, at an average price of $3 an acre.
Critics were also prone to overlook the fact that the land did not have even that relatively modest value until the railroads had ribboned it with steel.
Frontier villages touched by the magic wand of the iron rail became flourishing cities; those that were bypassed often withered away and became ghost towns.
Little wonder that communities fought one another for the privilege of playing host to the railroads.
Ambitious towns customarily held M E X I C O C  A  N  A  D  A n 0 0 500 Miles 500 Kilometers Pacific Time Time Time Time Eastern Central Mountain ME.
N.H.
MASS.
R.I.
CONN.
N.Y.
N.J.
DEL.
W.VA.
OHIO N.C.
S.C.
TENN.
ALA.
MISS.
FLA.
ARK.
ILL.
IND.
MICH.
WIS.
MINN.
IOWA NEB.
KANS.
TEXAS UTAH TERR.
OREG.
CALIF.
NEV.
WASH.
IDAHO INDIAN TERR.
N. MEX.
TERR.
COLO.
N. DAK.
S. DAK.
ARIZ.
TERR.
WYO.
MONT.
One square mile held by government or sold Right of way: 100 yards wide One square mile granted  to railroad Primary federal land grants to railroads Federal Land Grants to Railroads The heavy red lines indicate areas within which the railroads might be given specific parcels of land.
As shown in the inset, lands were reserved in belts of various widths on either side of a railroads right of way.
Until the railroad selected the individual mile-square sections it chose to possess,  withdrawn from eligibility for settlement.
The time zones were introduced in 1883 (see p.
534), and their boundaries have since been adjusted.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 out monetary and other attractions to the builders, who sometimes blackmailed them into contributing more generously.
Deadlock in the 1850s over the proposed transcontinental railroad was broken when the South seceded, leaving the field to the North.
In 1862, the year after the guns first spoke at Fort Sumter, Congress made provision for starting the long-awaited line.
One weighty argument for action was the urgency of bolstering the Union, already disrupted, by binding the Pacific Coastespecially gold-rich California more securely to the rest of the Republic.
The Union Pacific Railroadnote the word thrust westward from Omaha, Nebraska.
For each mile of track constructed, the company was granted 20 square miles of land, alternating in 640-acre sections on either side of the track.
For each mile the builders were also to receive a generous federal loan, ranging from $16,000 on the flat prairie land to $48,000 for mountainous country.
The laying of rails began in earnest after the Civil War ended in 1865, and with juicy loans and land grants available, the groundhog promoters made all possible haste.
Insiders of the Crdit Mobilier construction company reaped fabulous profits.
They slyly pocketed $73 million for some $50 million worth of breakneck construction, spending small change to bribe congressmen to look the other way.
Sweaty construction gangs, containing many Irish Paddies (Patricks) who had fought in the Union armies, worked at a frantic pace.
On one record-breaking day, a sledge-and-shovel army of some five thousand men laid ten miles of track.
A favorite song was, When hostile Indians attacked in futile efforts to protect what once rightfully had been their land, the laborers would drop their picks and seize their rifles.
Scores of menrailroad workers and Indianslost their lives as the rails stretched ever westward.
At rails end, workers tried their best to find relaxation and conviviality in their tented towns, known as hells on wheels, often teeming with as many as ten thousand men and a sprinkling of painted prostitutes and performers.
Rail laying at the California end was undertaken by the Central Pacific Railroad.
This line pushed boldly eastward from boomtown Sacramento, over and through the towering, snow-clogged Sierra Nevada.
Four farseeing menthe so-called Big Fourwere the chief financial backers of the enterprise.
The quartet included the heavyset, enterprising ex-governor Leland Stanford of California, who had useful political connections, and the burly, energetic Collis P. Huntington, an adept lobbyist.
The Big Four cleverly operated through two construction companies, and although they walked away with tens of millions in profits, they kept their hands relatively clean by not becoming involved in the bribery of congressmen.
The Central Pacific, which was granted the same princely subsidies as the Union Pacific, had the same incentive to haste.
Some ten thousand Chinese laborers, sweating from dawn to dusk under their basket hats, proved to be cheap, efficient, and expendable (hundreds lost their lives in premature explosions and other mishaps).
The towering Sierra Nevada presented a formidable barrier, and the nerves of the Big Four were strained when their workers could chip only a few inches a day tunneling through solid rock, while the Union Pacific was sledgehammering westward across the open plains.
A wedding of the rails was finally consummated near Ogden, Utah, in 1869, as two locomotivesfacing on a single track, half a world behind each backgently kissed cowcatchers.
The colorful ceremony included the breaking of champagne bottles and the driving of a last ceremonial (golden) spike, with ex-governor Leland Stanford clumsily wielding a silver sledgehammer.
* In all, the Union Pacific built 1,086 miles, the Central Pacific 689 miles.
Completion of the transcontinental linea magnificent engineering feat for that daywas one of Americas most impressive peacetime undertakings.
It welded the West Coast more firmly to the Union and facilitated a flourishing trade with Asia.
It penetrated the arid barrier of the deserts, paving the way for the phenomenal growth of the Great West.
Americans compared this electrifying achievement with the Declaration of Independence and the emancipation of the slaves; jubilant Philadelphians again rang the cracked bell of Independence Hall.
With the westward trail now blazed, four other transcontinental lines were completed before the centurys end.
None of them secured monetary loans from the federal government, as did the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific.
But all of them except the Great Northern received generous grants of land.
*The spike was promptly removed and is now exhibited at the Stanford University Museum.
The Northern Pacific Railroad, stretching from Lake Superior to Puget Sound, reached its terminus in 1883.
The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe, stretching through the southwestern deserts to California, was completed in 1884.
The Southern Pacific ribboned from New Orleans to San Francisco and was consolidated in the same year.
The last spike of the last of the five transcontinental railroads of the nineteenth century was hammered home in 1893.
The Great Northern, which ran from Duluth to Seattle north of the Northern Pacific, was the creation of a far-visioned Canadian-American, James J. Hill, a bearlike man who was probably the greatest railroad builder of all.
Endowed with a high sense of public duty, he perceived that the prosperity of his railroad depended on the prosperity of the area that it served.
He ran agricultural demonstration trains through the Hill Country and imported from England blooded bulls, which he distributed to the farmers.
His enterprise was so soundly organized that it rode through later financial storms with flying colors.
Yet the romance of the rails was not without its sordid side.
Pioneer builders were often guilty of gross overoptimism.
Avidly seeking land bounties and pushing into areas that lacked enough potential population to support a railroad, they sometimes laid down rails that led from nowhere to nothing.
When prosperity failed to smile upon their coming, they went into bankruptcy, carrying down with them the savings of trusting investors.
Many of the large railroads in the postCivil War decades passed through seemingly endless bankruptcies, mergers, or reorganizations.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 In their delirium of greed the managers of our transportation systems disregard both private right and the public welfare.
Today they will combine and bankrupt their weak rivals, and by the expenditure of a trifling sum possess themselves of properties which cost the outlay of millions.
Tomorrow they will capitalize their booty for five times the cost, issue their bonds, and proceed to levy tariffs upon the people to pay dividends upon the fraud.
The success of the western lines was facilitated by welding together and expanding the older eastern networks, notably the New York Central.
The genius in this enterprise was Commodore Cornelius Vanderbiltburly, boisterous, white-whiskered.
Having made his millions in steamboating, he daringly turned, in his late sixties, to a new career in railroading.
Though ill educated, ungrammatical, coarse, and ruthless, he was clear-visioned.
Offering superior railway service at lower rates, he amassed a fortune of $100 million.
His name is perhaps best remembered through his contribution of $1  million to the founding of Vanderbilt University in Tennessee.
Two significant new improvements proved a boon to the railroads.
One was the steel rail, which Vanderbilt helped popularize when he replaced the old iron tracks of the New York Central with the tougher metal.
Steel was safer and more economical because it could bear a heavier load.
A standard gauge of track width likewise came into wide use during the postwar years, thus eliminating the expense and inconvenience of numerous changes from one line to another.
Other refinements played a vital role in railroading.
The Westinghouse air brake, generally adopted in the 1870s, was a marvelous contribution to efficiency and safety.
The Pullman Palace Cars, advertised as gorgeous traveling hotels, were introduced on a considerable scale in the 1860s.
Alarmists condemned them as wheeled torture chambers and potential funeral pyres, for the wooden cars were equipped with swaying kerosene lamps.
Appalling accidents continued to be almost daily tragedies, despite safety devices like the telegraph (talking wires), double-tracking, and (later) the block signal.
The metallic fingers of the railroads intimately touched countless phases of American life.
For the first time, a sprawling nation became united in a physical sense, bound with ribs of iron and steel.
By stitching North America together from ocean to ocean, the transcontinental lines created an enormous domestic market for American raw materials and manufactured goodsprobably the largest integrated national market area in the world.
This huge empire of commerce beckoned to foreign and domestic investors alike, as well as to businesspeople who could now dare to dream on a continental scale.
More than any other single factor, the railroad network spurred the amazing industrialization of the postCivil War years.
The puffing locomotives opened up fresh markets for manufactured goods and sped raw materials to factories.
The forging of the rails themselves generated the largest single source of orders for the adolescent steel industry.
The screeching iron horse likewise stimulated mining and agriculture, especially in the West.
It took farmers out to their land, carried the fruits of their toil to market, and brought them their manufactured necessities.
Clusters of farm settlements paralleled the railroads, just as earlier they had followed the rivers.
Railways were a boon for cities and played a leading role in the great cityward movement of the last decades of the century.
The iron monsters could carry food to enormous concentrations of people and at the same time ensure them a livelihood by providing both raw materials and markets.
Railroad companies also stimulated the mighty stream of immigration.
Seeking settlers to whom their land grants might be sold at a profit, they advertised seductively in Europe and sometimes offered to transport the newcomers free to their farms.
The land also felt the impact of the railroad especially the broad, ecologically fragile midsection of the continent that Thomas Jefferson had purchased from France in 1803.
Settlers following the railroads plowed up the tallgrass prairies of Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, and Nebraska and planted welldrained, rectangular cornfields.
On the shortgrass prairies of the high plains in the Dakotas and Montana, range-fed cattle rapidly displaced the buffalo, which were hunted to near-extinction.
The white pine forests of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota disappeared into lumber that was rushed by rail to prairie farmers, who used it to build houses and fences.
Time itself was bent to the railroads needs.
Until the 1880s every town in the United States had its own local time, dictated by the suns position.
When it was noon in Chicago, it was 11:50  A .
in St.
Louis and 12:18  P .
in Detroit.
For railroad operators worried about keeping schedules and avoiding wrecks, this patchwork of local times was a nightmare.
Thus on November 18, 1883, the major rail lines decreed that the continent would henceforth be divided into four time zones.
Most communities quickly adopted railroad standard time.
Finally, the railroad, more than any other single factor, was the maker of millionaires.
A raw new aristocracy, consisting of lords of the rail, replaced the old southern lords of the lash.
The multiwebbed lines became the playthings of Wall Street, and colossal wealth was amassed by stock speculators and railroad wreckers.
Corruption lurks nearby when fabulous fortunes can materialize overnight.
The fleecings administered by the railroad construction companies, such as the Crdit Mobilier, were but the first of the bunco games that the railroad promoters learned to play.
Methods soon became more refined, as fastfingered financiers executed multimillion-dollar maneuvers beneath the noses of a bedazzled public.
Jay Gould was the most adept of these ringmasters of rapacity.
For nearly thirty years, he boomed and busted the stocks of the Erie, the Kansas Pacific,  the Union Pacific, and the Texas and Pacific in an incredible circus of speculative skullduggery.
One of the favorite devices of the moguls of manipulation was stock watering.
The term originally referred to the practice of making cattle thirsty C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 by feeding them salt and then having them bloat themselves with water before they were weighed in for sale.
Using a variation of this technique, railroad stock promoters grossly inflated their claims about a given lines assets and profitability and sold stocks and bonds far in excess of the railroads actual value.
Promoters profits were often the tail that wagged the iron horse itself.
Railroad managers were forced to charge extortionate rates and wage ruthless competitive battles in order to pay off the exaggerated financial obligations with which they were saddled.
The public interest was frequently trampled underfoot as the railroad titans waged their brutal wars.
Crusty old Cornelius Vanderbilt, when told that the law stood in his way, reportedly exclaimed, Law!
What do I care about the law?
Haint I got the power?
On another occasion he supposedly threatened some associates: I wont sue you, for the law is too slow.
Ill ruin you.
His son, William H. Vanderbilt, when asked in 1883 about the discontinuance of a fast mail train, reportedly snorted, The public be damned!
While abusing the public, the railroaders blandly bought and sold people in public life.
They bribed judges and legislatures, employed armtwisting lobbyists, and elected their own creatures to high office.
They showered free passes on journalists and politicians in profusion.
One railroad man noted in 1885 that in the West no man who has money, or official position, or influence thinks he ought to pay anything for riding on a railroad.
Railroad kings were, for a time, virtual industrial monarchs.
As manipulators of a huge natural monopoly, they exercised more direct control over the lives of more people than did the president of the United Statesand their terms were not limited to four years.
They increasingly shunned the crude bloodletting of cutthroat competition and began to cooperate with one another to rule the railroad dominion.
Sorely pressed to show at least some returns on their bloated investments, they entered into defensive alliances to protect precious profits.
The earliest form of combination was the poolan agreement to divide the business in a given area and share the profits.
Other rail barons granted secret rebates or kickbacks to powerful shippers in return for steady and assured traffic.
Often they slashed their rates on competing lines, but they more than made up the difference on noncompeting ones, where they might actually charge more for a short haul than for a long one.
It was neither healthy nor politically acceptable that so many people should be at the mercy of so  few.
Impoverished farmers, especially in the Midwest, began to wonder if the nation had not escaped from the slavery power only to fall into the hands of the money power, as represented by the railroad plutocracy.
But the American people, though quick to respond to political injustice, were slow to combat economic injustice.
Dedicated to free enterprise and to the principle that competition is the soul of trade, they cherished a traditionally keen pride in progress.
They remembered that Jeffersons ideals were hostile to government interference with business.
Above all, there shimmered the American dream: the hope that in a catch-as-catch-can economic system, anyone might become a millionaire.
The depression of the 1870s finally goaded  the farmers into protesting against being railroaded into bankruptcy.
Under pressure from organized agrarian groups like the Grange (Patrons of  Husbandry), many midwestern legislatures tried to regulate the railroad monopoly.
The scattered state efforts screeched to a halt in 1886.
The Supreme Court, in the famed  case, decreed that individual states had no power to regulate   monster were to be corralled, the federal government would have to do the job.
Stiff-necked President Cleveland did not look kindly on effective regulation.
But Congress ignored his grumbling indifference and passed the epochal Interstate Commerce Act in 1887.
It prohibited rebates and pools and required the railroads to publish their rates openly.
It also forbade unfair  discrimination against shippers and outlawed charging more for a short haul than for a long one over the same line.
Most important, it set up the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to administer and enforce the new legislation.
Despite acclaim, the Interstate Commerce Act emphatically did not represent a popular victory over corporate wealth.
One of the leading corporation lawyers of the day, Richard Olney, shrewdly noted that the new commission can be made of great use to the railroads.
It satisfies the popular clamor for a government supervision of railroads, at the same time that such supervision is almost entirely nominal.
The part of wisdom is not to destroy the Commission, but to utilize it.
What the new legislation did do was to provide an orderly forum where competing business interests could resolve their conflicts in peaceable ways.
The country could now avoid ruinous rate wars among the railroads and outraged, confiscatory attacks on the lines by pitchfork-prodded state legislatures.
This was a modest accomplishment but by no means an unimportant one.
The Interstate Commerce Act tended to stabilize, not revolutionize, the existing business system.
Yet the act still ranks as a red-letter law.
It was the first large-scale attempt by Washington to regulate business in the interest of society at large.
It heralded the arrival of a series of independent regulatory commissions in the next century, which would irrevocably commit the government to the daunting task of monitoring and guiding the private economy.
It foreshadowed the doom of freewheeling, buccaneering business practices and served full notice that there was a public interest in private enterprise that the government was bound to protect.
Postwar industrial expansion, partly a result of the railroad network, rapidly began to assume mammoth proportions.
When Lincoln was elected in 1860, the Republic ranked only fourth among the manufacturing nations of the world.
By 1894 it had bounded into first place.
Why the sudden upsurge?
Liquid capital, previously scarce, was now becoming abundant.
The word  been coined until the 1840s, and in 1861 only a handful of individuals were eligible for this class.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 But the Civil War, partly through profiteering, created immense fortunes, and these accumulations could now be combined with the customary borrowings from foreign capitalists.
The amazing natural resources of the nation were now about to be fully exploited, including coal, oil, and iron.
For example, the MinnesotaLake Superior region, which had yielded some iron ore by the 1850s, contributed the rich deposits of the Mesabi Range by the 1890s.
This priceless bonanza, where mountains of red-rusted ore could be scooped up by steam shovels, ultimately became a cornerstone of a vast steel empire.
Massive immigration helped make unskilled labor cheap and plentiful.
Steel, the keystone industry, built its strength largely on the sweat of lowpriced immigrant labor from eastern and southern Europe, working in two twelve-hour shifts, seven days a week.
American ingenuity at the same time played a vital role in the second American industrial revolution.
Techniques of mass production, pioneered by Eli Whitney, were being perfected by the captains of industry.
American inventiveness flowered luxuriantly in the postwar years: between 1860 and 1890 some 440,000 patents were issued.
Business operations were facilitated by such machines as the cash register, the stock ticker, and the typewriter (literary piano), which attracted women from the confines of home to industry.
Urbanization was speeded by the refrigerator car, the electric dynamo, and the electric railway, which displaced animaldrawn cars.
One of the most ingenious inventions was the telephone, introduced by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876.
A teacher of the deaf who was given a dead mans ear to experiment with, he remarked that if he could make the mute talk, he could make iron speak.
America was speedily turned into a nation of telephoniacs, as a gigantic communication network was built on his invention.
The social impact of this instrument was further revealed when an additional army of number please women was attracted from the stove to the switchboard.
Telephone boys were at first employed as operators, but their profanity shocked patrons.
The most versatile inventor of all was Thomas Alva Edison (18471931), who as a boy had been considered so dull-witted that he was taken out of school.
His severe deafness enabled him to concentrate without distraction.
Edison was a gifted tinkerer and a tireless worker, not a pure scientist.
Genius, he said, is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration.
Wondrous devices poured out of his invention factory in New Jerseythe phonograph, the mimeograph, the dictaphone, and the moving picture.
He is probably best known for his perfection in 1879 of the electric light bulb, which he unveiled after experimenting with some six thousand different filaments.
The electric light turned night into day and transformed ancient human habits as well.
People had previously slept an average of nine hours a night; now they slept just a bit more than seven hours.
Despite pious protests to the contrary, competition was the bugbear of most business leaders of the day.
Tycoons like Andrew Carnegie, the steel king; John D. Rockefeller, the oil baron; and J. Pierpont Morgan, the bankers banker, exercised their genius in devising ways to circumvent competition.
Carnegie integrated every phase of his steel-making operation.
His miners scratched the ore from the earth in the Mesabi Range; Carnegie ships floated it across the Great Lakes; Carnegie railroads delivered it  to the blast furnaces at Pittsburgh.
When the molten metal finally poured from the glowing crucibles into the waiting ingot molds, no other hands but those  in Carnegies employ had touched the product.
Carnegie thus pioneered the creative entrepreneurial tactic of vertical integration, combining into one organization all phases of manufacturing from The German and Irish millions, like the Negro, have a great deal of guano in their destiny.
They are ferried over the Atlantic, and carted over America, to ditch and to drudge, to make corn cheap, and then to lie down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on the prairie.
mining to marketing.
His goal was to improve efficiency by making supplies more reliable, controlling the quality of the product at all stages of production, and eliminating middlemens fees.
Less justifiable on grounds of efficiency was the technique of horizontal integration, which simply meant allying with competitors to monopolize a given market.
Rockefeller was a master of this stratagem.
He perfected a device for controlling bothersome rivalsthe trust.
Stockholders in various smaller oil companies assigned their stock to the board of directors of his Standard Oil Company, formed in 1870.
It then consolidated and concerted the operations of the previously competing enterprises.
Let us prey was said to be Rockefellers unwritten motto.
Ruthlessly wielding vast power, Standard Oil soon cornered virtually the entire world petroleum market.
Weaker competitors, left out of the trust agreement, were forced to the wall.
Rockefellers stunning success inspired many imitators, and the word  describe any large-scale business combination.
The imperial Morgan devised still other schemes for eliminating wasteful competition.
The depression of the 1890s drove into his welcoming arms many bleeding businesspeople, wounded by cutthroat competition.
His prescribed remedy was to consolidate rival enterprises and to ensure future harmony by placing officers of his own  banking syndicate on their various boards of directors.
These came to be known as interlocking  directorates.
Steel is king!
might well have been the exultant war cry of the new industrialized generation.
The mighty metal ultimately held together the new steel civilization, from skyscrapers to coal scuttles, while providing it with food, shelter, and transportation.
Steel making, notably rails for railroads, typified the dominance of heavy industry, which concentrated on making capital goods, as distinct from the production of consumer goods such as clothes and shoes.
Now taken for granted, steel was a scarce commodity in the wood-and-brick America of Abraham Lincoln.
Considerable iron went into railroad rails and bridges, but steel was expensive and was used largely for products like cutlery.
The early iron horse snorted exclusively (and dangerously) over iron rails.
When in the 1870s Commodore Vanderbilt of the New York Central began to use steel rails, he was forced to import them from Britain.
Yet within an amazing twenty years, the United States had outdistanced all foreign competitors and was pouring out more than one-third of the worlds supply of steel.
By 1900 America was producing as much as Britain and Germany combined.
What wrought the transformation?
Chiefly the invention in the 1850s of a method of making cheap steelthe Bessemer process.
It was named after a derided British inventor, although an American had stumbled on it a few years earlier.
William Kelly, a Kentucky manufacturer of iron kettles, discovered C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 that cold air blown on red-hot iron caused the metal to become white-hot by igniting the carbon and thus eliminating impurities.
He tried to apply the new air boiling technique to his own product,  but his customers decried Kellys fool steel, and his business declined.
Gradually the BessemerKelly process won acceptance, and these two crazy men ultimately made possible the present steel civilization.
A revolutionary steel-fabricating process was not the whole story.
America was one of the few places in the world where one could find relatively close together abundant coal for fuel, rich iron ore for smelting, and other essential ingredients for making steel.
The nation also boasted an abundant labor supply, guided by industrial know-how of  a high order.
The stage was set for miracles of production.
Kingpin among steelmasters was Andrew Carnegie, an undersized, charming Scotsman.
As a towheaded lad of thirteen, he was brought to America by his impoverished parents in 1848 and got a job as a bobbin boy at $1.20 a week.
Mounting the ladder of success so fast that he was said to have scorched the rungs, he forged ahead by working hard, doing the extra chore, cheerfully assuming responsibility, and smoothly cultivating influential people.
After accumulating some capital, Carnegie entered the steel business in the Pittsburgh area.
A gifted organizer and administrator, he succeeded by picking high-class associates and by eliminating many middlemen.
Although inclined to be toughfisted in business, he was not a monopolist and  disliked monopolistic trusts.
His remarkable organization was a partnership that involved, at its maximum, about forty Pittsburgh millionaires.
By 1900 he was producing one-fourth of the nations Bessemer steel, and the partners were dividing profits of $40 million a year, with the Napoleon of the Smokestacks himself receiving a cool $25 million.
These were the preincome tax days, when millionaires made real money and profits represented takehome pay.
Into the picture now stepped the financial giant of the age, J. Pierpont Morgan.
Jupiter Morgan had made a legendary reputation for himself and his Wall Street banking house by financing the reorganization of railroads, insurance companies, and banks.
An impressive figure of a man, with massive shoulders, shaggy brows, piercing eyes, and a bulbous, acne-cursed red nose, he had established an enviable reputation for integrity.
He did not believe that money power was dangerous, except when in dangerous handsand he did not regard his own hands as dangerous.
The force of circumstances brought Morgan and Carnegie into collision.
By 1900 the canny little Scotsman, weary of turning steel into gold, was eager to sell his holdings.
Morgan had meanwhile plunged heavily into the manufacture of steel pipe The man who dies leaving behind him millions of available wealth, which was his to administer during life, will pass away unwept, unhonored, and unsung, no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him.
Of such as these the public verdict will then be: The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.
tubing.
Carnegie, cleverly threatening to invade the same business, was ready to ruin his rival if he did not receive his price.
The steelmasters agents haggled with the imperious Morgan for eight agonizing hours, and the financier finally agreed to buy out Carnegie for over $400 million.
Fearing that he would die disgraced with so much wealth, Carnegie dedicated the remaining years of his life to giving away money for public libraries, pensions for professors, and other such philanthropic purposesin all disposing of about $350 million.
Morgan moved rapidly to expand his new industrial empire.
He took the Carnegie holdings, added others, watered the stock liberally, and in 1901 launched the enlarged United States Steel Corporation.
Capitalized at $1.4 billion, it was Americas first billion-dollar corporationa larger sum than the total estimated wealth of the nation in 1800.
The Industrial Revolution, with its hot Bessemer breath, had come into its own.
The sudden emergence of the oil industry was one of the most striking developments of the years during and after the Civil War.
Traces of oil found on streams had earlier been bottled for back-rub and other patent medicines, but not until 1859 did the first well in PennsylvaniaDrakes Follypour out its liquid black gold.
Almost overnight an industry was born that was to take more wealth from the earth, and more useful wealth at that, than all of the gold extracted by the forty-niners and their western successors.
Kerosene, derived from petroleum, was the first major product of the infant oil industry.
Burned from a cotton wick in a glass chimney lamp, kerosene produced a much brighter flame than whale oil.
The oil business boomed; by the 1870s kerosene was Americas fourth most valuable export.
Whaling, in contrast, the lifeblood of ocean-roaming New Englanders since before the days of  But what technology gives, technology takes away.
By 1885, 250,000 of Thomas Edisons electric light bulbs were in use; fifteen years later, perhaps 15 million.
The new electrical industry rendered kerosene obsolete just as kerosene had rendered whale oil obsolete.
Only in rural America and overseas did a market continue for oil-fired lamps.
Oil might thus have remained a modest, even a shrinking, industry but for yet another turn of the technological tidethe invention of the automobile.
By 1900 the gasoline-burning internal combustion engine had clearly bested its rivals, steam and electricity, as the superior means of automobile propulsion.
As the century of the automobile dawned, the oil business got a new, long-lasting, and hugely profitable lease on life.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 John D. Rockefellerlanky, shrewd, ambitious, abstemious (he neither drank, smoked, nor swore) came to dominate the oil industry.
Born to a family of precarious income, he became a successful businessman at age nineteen.
One upward stride led to another, and in 1870 he organized the Standard Oil Company of Ohio, nucleus of the great trust formed in 1882.
Locating his refineries in Cleveland, he sought to eliminate the middlemen and squeeze out competitors.
Pious and parsimonious, Rockefeller flourished in an era of completely free enterprise.
So-called piratical practices were employed by corsairs of finance, and business ethics were distressingly low.
Rockefeller, operating just to the windward of the law, pursued a policy of rule or ruin.
Sell all the oil that is sold in your district was the hard-boiled order that went out to his local agents.
By 1877 Rockefeller controlled 95 percent of all the oil refineries in the country.
RockefellerReckafellow, as Carnegie had once called himshowed little mercy.
A kind of primitive savagery prevailed in the jungle world of big business, where only the fittest survived.
Or so Rockefeller believed.
His son later explained that the giant American Beauty rose could be produced only by sacrificing the early buds that grew up around it.
His father pinched off the small buds with complete ruthlessness.
Employing spies and extorting secret rebates from the railroads, he even forced the lines to pay him rebates on the freight bills of his competitors!
Rockefeller thought he was simply obeying a law of nature.
The time was ripe for aggressive consolidation, he later reflected.
It had to come, though all we saw at the moment was the need to save ourselves from wasteful conditions.
The day of combination is here to stay.
Individualism has gone, never to return.
On the other side of the ledger, Rockefellers oil monopoly did turn out a superior product at a relatively cheap price.
It achieved important economies, both at home and abroad, by its large-scale methods of production and distribution.
This, in truth, was the tale of the other trusts as well.
The efficient use of expensive machinery called for bigness, and consolidation proved more profitable than ruinous price wars.
Other trusts blossomed along with the American Beauty of oil.
These included the sugar trust, the tobacco trust, the leather trust, and the harvester trust, which amalgamated some two hundred competitors.
The meat industry arose on the backs of bawling western herds, and meat kings like Gustavus F. Swift and Philip Armour took their place among the new royalty.
Wealth was coming to dominate the commonwealth.
These untrustworthy trusts, and the pirates who captained them, were disturbingly new.
They eclipsed an older American aristocracy of modestly successful merchants and professionals.
An arrogant class of new rich was now elbowing aside the patrician families in the mad scramble for power and prestige.
Not surprisingly, the ranks of the antitrust crusaders were frequently spearheaded by the best mengenteel old-family do-gooders who were not radicals but conservative defenders of their own vanishing influence.
Monarchs of yore invoked the divine right of kings, and Americas industrial plutocrats took a somewhat similar stance.
Some candidly credited heavenly help.
Godliness is in league with riches, preached the Episcopal bishop of Massachusetts, and hardfisted John D. Rockefeller piously acknowledged that the good Lord gave me my money.
Steel baron Andrew Carnegie agreed that the wealthy, entrusted with societys riches, had to prove themselves morally responsible according to a Gospel of Wealth.
But most defenders of wideopen capitalism relied more heavily on the survivalof-the-fittest theories of Charles Darwin.
The millionaires are a product of natural selection,  concluded Yale Professor and Social Darwinist William Graham Sumner.
They get high wages and live in luxury, but the bargain is a good one for society.
Despite plutocracy and deepening class divisions, the captains of industry provided material progress.
Self-justification by the wealthy inevitably involved contempt for the poor.
Many of the rich, especially the newly rich, had pulled themselves up by their own bootstraps; hence they concluded that those who stayed poor must be lazy and lacking  in enterprise.
The Reverend Russell Conwell of Philadelphia became rich by delivering his lecture Acres of Diamonds thousands of times.
In it he charged, There is not a poor person in the United States who was not made poor by his own shortcomings.
Such attitudes were a formidable roadblock to social reform.
Plutocracy, like the earlier slavocracy, took its stand firmly on the Constitution.
The clause that gave Congress sole jurisdiction over interstate commerce was a godsend to the monopolists; their high-priced lawyers used it time and again to thwart controls by C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 the state legislatures.
Giant trusts likewise sought refuge behind the Fourteenth Amendment, which had been originally designed to protect the rights of the ex-slaves as persons.
The courts ingeniously interpreted a corporation to be a legal person and decreed that, as such, it could not be deprived of its property by a state without due process of law (see Amendment XIV, para.
There is some questionable evidence that slippery corporation lawyers deliberately inserted this loophole when the Fourteenth Amendment was being fashioned in 1866.
Great industrialists likewise sought to incorporate in easy states, like New Jersey, where the restrictions on big business were mild or nonexistent.
For example, the Southern Pacific Railroad, with much of its trackage in California, was incorporated in Kentucky.
At long last the masses of the people began to mobilize against monopoly.
They first tried to control the trusts through state legislation, as they had earlier attempted to curb the railroads.
Failing here, as before, they were forced to appeal to Congress.
After prolonged pulling and hauling, the Sherman AntiTrust Act of 1890 was finally signed into law.
The Sherman Act flatly forbade combinations in restraint of trade, without any distinction between good trusts and bad trusts.
Bigness, not badness, was the sin.
The law proved ineffective, largely because it had only baby teeth or no teeth at all, and because it contained legal loopholes through which clever corporation lawyers could wriggle.
But it was unexpectedly effective in one respect.
Contrary to its original intent, it was used to curb labor unions or labor combinations that were deemed to be restraining trade.
Early prosecutions of the trusts by the Justice Department under the Sherman Act of 1890, as it turned out, were neither vigorous nor successful.
The decisions in seven of the first eight cases presented by the attorney general were adverse to the government.
More new trusts were formed in the 1890s under President McKinley than during any other like period.
Not until 1914 were the paper jaws of the Sherman Act fitted with reasonably sharp teeth.
Until then, there was some question whether the government would control the trusts or the trusts the government.
But the iron grip of monopolistic corporations was being threatened.
A revolutionary new principle had been written into the law books by the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890, as well as by the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887.
Private greed must henceforth be subordinated to public need.
The industrial tidal wave that washed over the North after the Civil War caused only feeble ripples in the backwater of the South.
As late as 1900, the South still produced a smaller percentage of the nations manufactured goods than it had before  the Civil War.
The plantation system had degenerated into a pattern of absentee land ownership.
White and black sharecroppers now tilled the soil for a share of the crop, or they became tenants, in bondage to their landlords, who controlled needed credit and supplies.
Southern agriculture received a welcome boost in the 1880s, when machine-made cigarettes replaced the roll-your-own variety and tobacco consumption shot up.
James Buchanan Duke took full advantage of the new technology to mass-produce the dainty coffin nails.
In 1890, in what was becoming a familiar pattern, he absorbed his main competitors into the American Tobacco Company.
The cigarette czar later showed such generosity to Trinity College, near his birthplace in Durham, North Carolina, that the trustees gratefully changed its name to Duke University.
The fruits of the toil of millions are boldly stolen to build up colossal fortunes for a few .
and the possessors of these, in turn despise the Republic and endanger liberty.
From the same prolific womb of governmental injustice we breed the two great classestramps and millionaires.
Industrialists tried to coax the agricultural South out of the fields and into the factories, but with only modest success.
The region remained overwhelmingly rural.
Prominent among the boosters of a new South was silver-tongued Henry W. Grady, editor of the  lessly exhorted the ex-Confederates to become Georgia Yankees and outplay the North at the commercial and industrial game.
Yet formidable obstacles lay in the path of southern industrialization.
One was the paper barrier of regional rate-setting systems imposed by the northern-dominated railroad interests.
Railroads gave preferential rates to manufactured goods moving southward from the north, but in the opposite direction they discriminated in favor of southern raw materials.
The net effect was to keep the South in a kind of Third World servitude to the Northeastas a supplier of raw materials to the manufacturing metropolis, unable to develop a substantial industrial base of its own.
A bitter example of this economic discrimination against the South was the Pittsburgh plus pricing system in the steel industry.
Rich deposits of C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 SPINDLES IN NEW ENGLAND (by thousands) SPINDLES IN COTTON STATES (by thousands) 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1980                                 8,632                         10,934                  13,171         15,735 18,287                        11,351                                            5,279                                                 3,739                                                    269 561    1,570  4,368                     10,494                                     15,231                                               18,586                                            17,641                                             17,673                                       16,795 Cotton Manufacturing Moves South, 18801980 Textile manufacturing usually looms large in the early stages of industrial development.
In later stages it gives way to higher-technology businesses.
This trend can be seen here, both in the migration of textile manufacturing to the southern United States and in the decline in the number of spindles in the United States as a whole since the 1930s, as developing Third World countries  became major textile producers.
coal and iron ore near Birmingham, Alabama, worked by low-wage southern labor, should have given steel manufacturers there a competitive edge, especially in southern markets.
But the steel lords of Pittsburgh brought pressure to bear on the compliant railroads.
As a result, Birmingham steel, no matter where it was delivered, was charged a fictional fee, as if it had been shipped from Pittsburgh.
This stunting of the Souths natural economic advantages throttled the growth of the Birmingham steel industry.
In manufacturing cotton textiles, the South fared considerably better.
Southerners had long resented shipping their fiber to New England, and now their cry was Bring the mills to the cotton.
Beginning about 1880, northern capital began to erect cotton mills in the South, largely in response to tax benefits and the prospect of cheap and nonunionized labor.
(See the chart at left.
) American Industry in 1900 By the end of the nineteenth century, once-rural America boasted the worlds largest industrial outputa development with enormous consequences for politics, diplomacy, and family life.
Atlanta Constitution The South didnt furnish a thing on earth for that funeral but the corpse and the hole in the ground.
They buried him in a New York coat and a Boston pair of shoes and a pair of breeches from Chicago and a shirt from Cincinnati, leaving him nothing to carry into the next world with him to remind him of the country in which he lived, and for which he fought for four years, but the chill of blood in his veins and the marrow in his bones.
The textile mills proved a mixed blessing to the economically blighted South.
They slowly wove an industrial thread into the fabric of southern life, but at a considerable human cost.
Cheap labor was the Souths major attraction for potential investors, and keeping labor cheap became almost a religion among southern industrialists.
The mills took root in the chronically depressed piedmont region of southern Appalachia and came to dominate utterly the communities in which they were located.
Rural southernersvirtually all of them white, for blacks were excluded from all but the most menial jobs in the millspoured out of the hills and hollows to seek employment in the hastily erected company mill towns.
Entire familiesoften derided as hillbillies or lint-headsworked from dawn to dusk amid the whirring spindles.
They were paid at half the rate of their northern counterparts and often received their compensation in the form of credit at a company store, to which they were habitually in debt.
But despite their depressed working conditions and poor pay, many southerners saw employment in the mills as a salvation, the first steady jobs and wages they had ever known.
With many mills anxious to tap the cheap labor of women and children, mill work often offered destitute farm-fugitive families their only chance to remain together.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 Economic miracles wrought during the decades after the Civil War enormously increased the wealth of the Republic.
The standard of living rose sharply, and well-fed American workers enjoyed more physical comforts than their counterparts in any other industrial nation.
Urban centers mushroomed as the insatiable factories demanded more American labor and as immigrants swarmed like honeybees to the new jobs (see Makers of America: The Poles, pp.
734735).
Early Jeffersonian ideals were withering before the smudgy blasts from the smokestacks.
As agriculture declined in relation to manufacturing, America could no longer aspire to be a nation of small freehold farms.
Jeffersons concepts of free enterprise, with neither help nor hindrance from Washington, were being thrown out the factory window.
Tariffs had already provided assistance, but the long arm of federal authority was now committed to decades of corporation curbing and trust-busting.
Older ways of life also wilted in the heat of the factory furnaces.
The very concept of time was revolutionized.
Rural American migrants and peasant European immigrants, used to living by the languid clock of nature, now had to regiment their lives  by the factory whistle.
The seemingly arbitrary discipline of industrial labor did not come easily and sometimes had to be forcibly taught.
One large  The pell-mell onrush of industrialization after the Civil War spawned countless human abuses, few more objectionable than the employment of children, often in hazardous jobs.
For decades, reformers tried to arouse public outrage against child labor, and they made significant headway at last with the help of photographyespecially the photographs of Lewis W. Hine (18741940).
A native of Wisconsin, Hine in 1908 became the staff photographer for the National Child Labor Committee, an organization committed to ending child labor.
This 1909 photo of young doffers, whose job it was to remove fully wound bobbins from textile spinning machines, is typical of Hines work.
He shows the boys climbing dangerously on the whirling mechanism, and his own caption for the photo names the millBibb Mill No.
1, Macon, Georgiabut not the boys, as if to underline the impersonal, dehumanizing nature of their work, and the specific responsibilities of their employer.
His other subjects included child workers on Colorado beet farms, in Pennsylvania coal mines and Gulf Coast fish canneries, and in the glass, tobacco, and garment trades.
Hines images contributed heavily to the eventual success of the campaign to end child labor in the New Deal era.
He is also celebrated as one of the fathers of documentary photography.
Why might Hines graphic images have succeeded in stirring public opinion more powerfully than factual and statistical demonstrations of the evil of child labor?
Given Hines own reform objectives, can his photographsor any so-called documentary imagesbe taken at face value as literal, accurate information about the past?
corporation simultaneously instructed its Polish immigrant workers in the English language and in the obligations of factory work schedules: Probably no single group was more profoundly affected by the new industrial age than women.
Propelled into industry by recent inventions, chiefly the typewriter and the telephone switchboard, millions of stenographers and hello girls discovered new economic and social opportunities.
The Gibson Girl, a magazine image of an independent and athletic new woman created in the 1890s by the artist Charles Dana Gibson, became the romantic ideal of the age.
For middle-class women, careers often meant delayed marriages and smaller families.
Most women workers, however, toiled neither for independence nor for glamour, but out of economic necessity.
They faced the same long hours and dangerous working conditions as did their mates and brothers, and they earned less, as wages for womens jobs were usually set below those for mens.
The clattering machine age likewise accentuated class division.
Industrial buccaneers flaunted bloated fortunes, and their rags-to-riches spouses displayed glittering diamonds.
Such extravagances evoked bitter criticism.
Some of it was envious, but much of it rose from a small but increasingly vocal group of socialists and other radicals, many of whom were recent European immigrants.
The existence of an oligarchy of money was amply demonstrated by the fact that in 1900 about one-tenth  of the people owned nine-tenths of the nations wealth.
A nation of farmers and independent producers was becoming a nation of wage earners.
In 1860 half of all workers were self-employed; by the centurys end, two of every three working Americans depended on wages.
Real wages were rising, and times were good for workers who were working.
But with dependence on wages came vulnerability to the swings of the economy and the whims of the employer.
The fear of unemployment was never distant.
A breadwinners illness could mean catastrophe for an entire family.
Nothing more sharply defined the growing difference between workingclass and middle-class conditions of life than the precariousness of the laborers lot.
Reformers struggled to introduce a measure of securityjob and wage protection, and provision for temporary unemploymentinto the lives of the working class.
Finally, strong pressures for foreign trade developed as the tireless industrial machine threatened to C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 saturate the domestic market.
American products radiated out all over the worldnotably the fivegallon kerosene can of the Standard Oil Company.
The flag follows trade, and empire tends to follow the flaga harsh lesson that America was soon to learn.
Sweat of the laborer lubricated the vast new industrial machine.
Yet the wage workers did not share proportionately with their employers in the benefits of the age of big business.
The worker, suggestive of the Roman galley slave, was becoming a lever-puller in a giant mechanism.
Individual originality and creativity were being stifled, and less value than ever before was being placed on manual skills.
Before the Civil War, the worker might have toiled in a small plant whose owner hailed the employee in the morning by  first name and inquired after the familys health.
But now the factory hand was employed by a corporationdepersonalized, bodiless, soulless, and often conscienceless.
The directors knew the worker not; and in fairness to their stockholders they  were not inclined to engage in large-scale private philanthropy.
New machines displaced employees, and though in the long run more jobs were created than destroyed, in the short run the manual worker was often hard hit.
A glutted labor market, moreover, severely handicapped wage earners.
Employers could take advantage of the vast new railroad network and bring in unemployed workers, from the four corners of the country and beyond, to beat down high wage levels.
During the 1880s and 1890s, several hundred thousand unskilled workers a year poured into the country from Europe, creating a labor market more favorable to the boss than the worker.
Individual workers were powerless to battle  single-handedly against giant industry.
Forced to organize and fight for basic rights, they found the dice heavily loaded against them.
The corporation could dispense with the individual worker much more easily than the worker could dispense with the corporation.
Employers could pool vast wealth through thousands of stockholders, retain highpriced lawyers, buy up the local press, and put  pressure on the politicians.
They could import strikebreakers (scabs) and employ thugs to beat up labor organizers.
In 1886 Jay Gould reputedly boasted, I can hire one-half of the working class to kill the other half.
Corporations had still other weapons in their arsenals.
They could call upon the federal courts presided over by well-fed and conservative judges to issue injunctions ordering the strikers to cease striking.
If defiance and disorders ensued, the company could request the state and federal authorities to bring in troops.
Employers could lock their doors against rebellious workersa procedure called the lockoutand then starve them into submission.
They could compel them to sign ironclad oaths or yellow-dog contracts, both of which were solemn agreements not to join a labor union.
They could put the names of agitators on a black list and circulate it among fellow employers.
A corporation might even own the company town, with its highpriced grocery stores and easy credit.
Often the worker sank into perpetual debta status that strongly resembled serfdom.
Countless thousands of blackened coal miners were born in a company house, nurtured by a (high-priced) company store, and buried in a company graveyardprematurely dead.
The middle-class public, annoyed by recurrent strikes, grew deaf to the outcry of the worker.
American wages were perhaps the highest in the world, although a dollar a day for pick-and-shovel labor does not now seem excessive.
Carnegie and Rockefeller had battled their way to the top, and the view was common that the laborer could do likewise.
The trade union, which originated under the European system, destroys liberty.
I do not say a dollar a day is enough to support a working man, but it is enough to support a man.
Not enough to support a man and five children if a man insists on smoking and drinking beer.
Somehow the strike seemed like a foreign importationsocialistic and hence unpatriotic.
Big business might combine into trusts to raise prices, but the worker must not combine into unions to raise wages.
Unemployment seemed to be an act of God, who somehow would take care of the laborer.
Labor unions, which had been few and disorganized in 1861, were given a strong boost by the Civil War.
This bloody conflict, with its drain on human resources, put more of a premium on labor; and the mounting cost of living provided an urgent incentive to unionization.
By 1872 there were several hundred thousand organized workers and thirtytwo national unions, representing such crafts as bricklayers, typesetters, and shoemakers.
The National Labor Union, organized in 1866, represented a giant bootstride by workers.
The union lasted six years and attracted the impressive total of some 600,000 members, including the skilled, unskilled, and farmers, though in keeping with the times, it excluded the Chinese and made only nominal efforts to include women and blacks.
Black workers organized their own Colored National Labor Union as an adjunct, but their support for the Republican party and the persistent racism of white unionists prevented the two national unions from working together.
The National Labor Union agitated for the arbitration of industrial disputes and the eight-hour workday, and won the latter for government workers.
But the devastating depression of the 1870s dealt it a knockout blow.
Labor was generally rocked back on its heels during the tumultuous years of the depression, but it never completely  toppled.
Wage reductions in 1877 touched off such disruptive strikes on the railroads that nothing short of federal troops could restore order.
C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 A new organizationthe Knights of Labor seized the torch dropped by the defunct National Labor Union (see Makers of America: The Knights of Labor, pp.
552553).
Officially known as The Noble and Holy Order of the Knights of Labor, it began inauspiciously in 1869 as a secret society, with a private ritual, passwords, and a special handshake.
Secrecy, which continued until 1881, would forestall possible reprisals by employers.
The Knights of Labor, like the National Labor Union, sought to include all workers in one big union.
Their slogan was An injury to one is the concern of all.
A welcome mat was rolled out for the skilled and unskilled, for men and women, for whites and underprivileged blacks, some ninety thousand of whom joined.
The Knights barred only nonproducersliquor dealers, professional gamblers, lawyers, bankers, and stockbrokers.
Setting up broad goals, the embattled Knights refused to thrust their lance into politics.
Instead they campaigned for economic and social reform, including producers cooperatives and codes for safety and health.
Voicing the war cry Labor is the only creator of values and capital, they frowned upon industrial warfare while fostering industrial arbitration.
The ordinary workday was then ten hours or more, and the Knights waged a determined campaign for the eight-hour stint.
A favorite song of these years ran, Under the eloquent but often erratic leadership of Terence V. Powderly, an Irish-American of nimble wit and fluent tongue, the Knights won a number of strikes for the eight-hour day.
When the Knights staged a successful strike against Jay Goulds Wabash Railroad in 1885, membership mushroomed, to about three-quarters of a million workers.
Despite their outward success, the Knights were riding for a fall.
They became involved in a number of May Day strikes in 1886, about half of which failed.
A focal point was Chicago, home to about eighty thousand Knights.
The city was also honeycombed with a few hundred anarchists, many of them  foreign-born, who were advocating a violent overthrow of the American government.
Tensions rapidly built up to the bloody Haymarket Square episode.
Labor disorders had broken out, and on May 4, 1886, the Chicago police advanced on a meeting called to protest alleged brutalities by the authorities.
Suddenly a dynamite bomb was thrown that killed or injured several dozen people, including police.
Hysteria swept the Windy City.
Eight anarchists were rounded up, although nobody proved that they had anything to do directly with the bomb.
But the judge and jury held that since they had preached incendiary doctrines, they could be charged with conspiracy.
Five were sentenced to death, one of whom committed suicide, and the other three were given stiff prison terms.
Agitation for clemency mounted.
In 1892, some six years later, John P. Altgeld, a German-born Democrat of strong liberal tendencies, was elected governor of Illinois.
After studying the Haymarket case exhaustively, he pardoned the three survivors.
Violent abuse was showered on him by conservatives, unstinted praise by those who thought the men innocent.
He was defeated for reelection and died a few years later in relative obscurity, The Eagle Forgotten.
Whatever the merits of the case, Altgeld displayed courage in opposing what he regarded as a gross injustice.
The Haymarket Square bomb helped blow the props from under the Knights of Labor.
They were associated in the public mind, though mistakenly, with the anarchists.
The eight-hour movement suffered correspondingly, and subsequent strikes by the Knights met with scant success.
Another fatal handicap of the Knights was their inclusion of both skilled and unskilled workers.
Unskilled labor could easily be replaced by strikebreaking scabs.
High-class craft unionists, who enjoyed a semimonopoly of skills, could not readily be supplanted and hence enjoyed a superior bargaining position.
They finally wearied of sacrificing this advantage on the altar of solidarity with their unskilled coworkers and sought refuge in a federation of exclusively skilled craft unionsthe American Federation of Labor.
The desertion of the skilled craft unionists dealt the Knights a body blow.
By the 1890s they had melted away to 100,000 members, and these gradually fused with other protest groups of that decade.
t was 1875.
The young worker was guided into a room, where his blindfold was removed.
Surrounding him were a dozen men, their faces covered by hoods.
One of the masked figures solemnly asked three questions: Do you believe in God?
Do you gain your bread by the sweat of your brow?
Are you willing to take a solemn vow, binding you to secrecy, obedience, and mutual assistance?
Yes, came the reply.
The men doffed their hoods and joined hands in a circle.
Their leader, the Master Workman, declared, On behalf of the toiling millions of earth, I welcome you to this Sanctuary, dedicated to the service of God, by serving humanity.
Then the entire group burst into song: The carefully staged pageantry then drew to a close.
The worker was now a full-fledged member of the Knights of Labor.
He had just joined a loose-knit organization  of some 100,000 workingpeople, soon to swell to nearly one million after the Knights led several successful strikes in the 1880s.
The first women Knights joined in 1881, when an all-female local was established in the shoe trade in Philadelphia, and one in ten members were women by 1885.
They were organizers, too.
Fiery Mary Harris (Mother) Jones got her start agitating for the Knights in the Illinois coal fields.
The first all-black local was founded among coal miners in Ottumwa, Iowa.
The Knights preached tolerance and the solidarity of all working men and women, and they meant it, but even their inclusionary spirit had its limits.
Chinese workers were barred from joining, and the Knights vigorously supported the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882.
They also championed the Contract Labor Law of 1885, which aimed to restrain competition from low-wage immigrant workersthough immigrants, especially the Irish, were themselves disproportionately represented among the Knights membership.
Terence V. Powderly, born to Irish immigrant parents in Carbondale, Pennsylvania, in 1849, became the Grand Master Workman of the Knights in 1879.
Slightly built, with mild blue eyes behind glasses, he had dropped out of school at age thirteen to take a job guarding railroad track switches and rose to mayor of Scranton, Pennsylvania, in the 1870s.
In 1894 he became a lawyerdespite the fact that the Knights excluded lawyers from membership.
A complex, colorful, and sometimes cynical man, he denounced the multimillionaires [for]  laying the foundation for their colossal fortunes on the bodies and souls of living men.
In the eyes of Powderly and his Knights, only the economic and political independence of American workers could preserve republican traditions and institutions from corruption by monopolists and other parasites.
Powderly denounced wage-slavery and dedicated the Knights to achieving the cooperative commonwealth.
Shunning socialism, which advocated government ownership of the means of production, Powderly urged laborers to save enough from their wages to purchase mines, factories, railroads, and stores.
They would thereby create a kind of toilers utopia; because labor would own and operate those enterprises, workers themselves would be ownerproducers, and the conflict between labor and capital would evaporate.
The Knights actually did operate a few businesses, including coal mines in Indiana, but all eventually failed.
Powderlys vision of the cooperative commonwealth reflected the persistent dream of many nineteenth-century American workers that they would all one day become producers.
As expectant capitalists, they lacked class consciousnessthat is, a sense of themselves as a permanent working class that must organize to coax what benefits it could out of the capitalist system.
Samuel Gompers, by contrast, accepted the framework of American capitalism, and his American Federation of Labor sought to work within that framework, not to overturn it.
Gomperss conservative strategy, not Powderlys utopian dream, eventually carried the day.
The swift decline of the Knights in the 1890s underscored the obsolescence of their unrealistic, even naive, view that a bygone age of independent producers could be restored.
Yet the Knights commitment to unifying all workers in one union regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or skill level provided a blueprint for the eventual success of similarly committed unions like the Congress of Industrial Organizations in the 1930s.
The elitist American Federation of Labor, born in 1886, was largely the brainchild of squat, squarejawed Samuel Gompers.
This colorful Jewish cigar maker, born in a London tenement and removed from school at age ten, was brought to America when thirteen.
Taking his turn at reading informative literature to fellow cigar makers in New York, he was pressed into overtime service because of his strong voice.
Rising spectacularly in the labor ranks, he was elected president of the American Federation of Labor every year except one from 1886 to 1924.
Significantly, the American  was just what it called itselfa federation.
It consisted of an association of self-governing national unions, each of which kept its independence, with the AF of L unifying overall strategy.
No individual laborer as such could join the central organization.
Gompers adopted a down-to-earth approach, soft-pedaling attempts to engineer sweeping social reform.
A bitter foe of socialism, he shunned politics for economic strategies and goals.
Gompers had no quarrel with capitalism, but he demanded a fairer share for labor.
All he wanted, he said, was more.
Promoting what he called a pure and simple unionism, he sought better wages, hours, and working conditions.
Unlike the somewhat utopian Knights of Labor, he was not concerned with the sweet by-and-by, but with the bitter here and now.
A major goal of Gompers was the trade agreement authorizing the closed shopor all-union labor.
His chief weapons were the walkout and the boycott, enforced by We dont patronize signs.
The stronger craft unions of the federation, by pooling funds, were able to amass a war chest that would enable them to ride out prolonged strikes.
The AF of L thus established itself on solid but narrow foundations.
Although attempting to speak for all workers, it fell far short of being representative of them.
Composed of skilled craftsmen, like the carpenters and the bricklayers, it was willing to let unskilled laborers, including women and especially blacks, fend for themselves.
Though hardpressed by big industry, the federation was basically nonpolitical.
But it did attempt to persuade members to reward friends and punish foes at the polls.
The AF of L weathered the panic of 1893 reasonably C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 well, and by 1900 it could boast a membership of 500,000.
Critics referred to it, with questionable accuracy, as the labor trust.
Labor disorders continued, peppering the years from 1881 to 1900 with an alarming total of over 23,000 strikes.
These disturbances involved 6,610,000 workers, with a total loss to both employers and employees of $450 million.
The strikers lost about half their strikes and won or compromised the remainder.
Perhaps the gravest weakness of organized labor was that it still embraced only a small minority of all workingpeopleabout 3 percent in 1900.
But attitudes toward labor had begun to change perceptibly by 1900.
The public was beginning to concede the right of workers to organize, to bargain collectively, and to strike.
As a sign of the times, Labor Day was made a legal holiday by act of Congress in 1894.
A few enlightened industrialists had come to perceive the wisdom of avoiding costly economic warfare by bargaining with the unions and signing agreements.
But the vast majority of employers continued to fight organized labor, which achieved its grudging gains only after recurrent strikes and frequent reverses.
Nothing was handed to it on a silver platter.
Management still held the whip hand, and several trouble-fraught decades were to pass before labor was to gain a position of relative equality with capital.
If the age of big business had dawned, the age of big labor was still some distance over the horizon.
Congress authorizes a transcontinental railroad National Labor Union organized Transcontinental railroad joined near Ogden, Utah Knights of Labor organized Standard Oil Company organized Bell invents the telephone Edison invents the electric light Haymarket Square bombing American Federation of Labor formed Interstate Commerce Act Sherman Anti-Trust Act United States Steel Corporation formed he capitalists who forged an industrial America in the late nineteenth century were once called captains of industrya respectful title that bespoke the awe due their wondrous material accomplishments.
But these economic innovators have never been universally admired.
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, when the entire industrial order they had created seemed to have collapsed utterly,  it was fashionable to speak of them as robber baronsa term implying scorn for their highhanded methods.
This sneer often issued from the lips and pens of leftist critics like Matthew Josephson, who sympathized with the working classes that were allegedly brutalized by the factory system.
Criticism has also come from writers nostalgic for a preindustrial past.
These critics believe that industrialization stripped away the traditions, values, and pride of native farmers and immigrant craftspeople.
Conceding that economic development elevated the material standard of living for working Americans, this interpretation contends that the Industrial Revolution diminished their spiritual quality of life.
Accordingly, historians like Herbert Gutman and David Montgomery portray C HAPTER 24 Industry Comes of Age, 18651900 labors struggle for control of the workplace as the central drama of industrial expansion.
Nevertheless, even these historians concede that class-based protest has never been as powerful a force in the United States as in certain European countries.
Many historians believe that this is so because greater social mobility in America dampened class tensions.
The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville noted in the 1830s that America had few huge inherited fortunes and that most of its wealthy men were self-made.
For two centuries a majority of Americans have believed that greater opportunity distinguished the New World from the Old.
In the 1960s historians led by Stephan Thernstrom began to test this long-standing belief.
Looking at such factors as occupation, wealth, and geographic mobility, they tried to gauge the nature and extent of social mobility in the United States.
Most of these historians concluded that although relatively few Americans made rags-to-riches leaps like those heralded in the Horatio Alger stories, large numbers experienced small improvements in their economic and social status.
Few sons of laborers became corporate tycoons, but many more became line bosses and white-collar clerks.
These studies also have found that race and ethnicity often affected ones chances for success.
For instance, the children and grandchildren of Jewish immigrants tended to rise faster in the professions than Americans of Italian and Irish descent.
Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, blacks lagged far behind other groups in almost every  category.
In recent years such studies have been criticized by certain historians who point out the difficulties involved in defining social status.
For instance, some white-collar clerical workers received lower wages than manual laborers did.
Were they higher or lower on the social scale?
Furthermore, James Henretta has pointed out that different groups defined success differently: whereas Jewish immigrants often struggled to give their sons professional educations, the Irish put more emphasis on acquiring land, and Italians on building small family-run businesses.
Meanwhile, leftist historians such as Michael Katz have argued that the degree of social mobility in America has been overrated.
These historians argue that industrial capitalism created two classes: a working class that sold its labor, and a business class that controlled resources and bought labor.
Although most Americans took small steps upward, they generally remained within the class in which they began.
Thus, these historians argue, the inequality of a capitalistic class system persisted in Americas seemingly fluid society.
For further reading, see page A17 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  America Moves to the City  18651900 L YMAN A BBOTT , 1891 B orn in the country, America moved to the city in the decades following the Civil War.
By the year 1900, the United States upsurging population nearly doubled from its level of some 40 million souls enumerated in the census of 1870.
Yet in the very same period, the population of American cities out of ten Americans were city dwellers, in striking contrast to the rustic population of stagecoach days.
This cityward drift affected not only the United States but most of the Western world.
European peasants, pushed off the land in part by competition from cheap American foodstuffs, were pulled into citiesin both Europe and Americaby the new lure of industrial jobs.
A revolution in American agriculture thus fed the industrial and urban revolutions in Europe, as well as in the United States.
The growth of American metropolises was spectacular.
In 1860 no city in the United States could boast a million inhabitants; by 1890 New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia had vaulted past the million mark.
By 1900 New York, with some 3.5 million people, was the second largest city in the world, outranked only by London.
Cities grew both up and out.
The cloud-brushing skyscraper allowed more people and workplaces to be packed onto a parcel of land.
Appearing first as a ten-story building in Chicago in 1885, the skyscraper was made usable by the perfecting of the electric elevator.
An opinionated Chicago architect, Louis Sullivan (18561924), contributed formidably to the further development of the skyscraper with his famous principle that form follows function.
Nesting loftily above city streets in the new steelskeleton high-rises that Sullivan helped to make popular, many Americans were becoming modern cliff dwellers.
Americans were also becoming commuters, carted daily between home and job on the masstransit lines that radiated out from central cities to surrounding suburbs.
Electric trolleys, powered by wagging antennae from overhead wires, propelled city limits explosively outward.
The compact and communal walking city, its boundaries fixed by the limits of leg-power, gave way to the immense and impersonal megalopolis, carved into distinctly different districts for business, industry, and residential neighborhoodswhich were in turn segregated by race, ethnicity, and social class.
Rural America could not compete with the siren song of the city.
Industrial jobs, above all, drew country folks off the farms and into factory centers.
But the urban lifestyle also held powerful attractions.
The predawn milking of cows had little appeal when compared with the late-night glitter of  city lights.
Electricity, indoor plumbing, and telephoneswhose numbers leapt from some 50,000 in 1880 to over 1 million in 1900all made life in the big city more alluring.
Engineering marvels like  the skyscraper and New Yorks awesome Brooklyn Bridge, a harplike suspension span dedicated in 1883, further added to the seductive glamour of the gleaming cities.
Cavernous department stores such as Macys in New York and Marshall Fields in Chicago attracted urban middle-class shoppers and provided urban working-class jobs, many of them for women.
The bustling emporiums also heralded a dawning era of consumerism and accentuated widening class divisions.
When Carrie Meeber, novelist Theodore Dreisers fictional heroine in  escapes from rural boredom to Chicago just before the turn of the century, it is the spectacle of the citys C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 dazzling department stores that awakens her fateful yearning for a richer, more elegant way of lifefor entry into the privileged urban middle class, whose existence she had scarcely imagined in the rustic countryside.
The move to the city introduced Americans to new ways of living.
Country dwellers produced little household waste.
Domestic animals or scavenging pigs ate food scraps on the farm.
Rural women mended and darned worn clothing rather than discard it.
Household products were sold in bulk at the local store, without wrapping.
Mail-order houses such as Sears and Montgomery Ward, which increasingly displaced the rural general store in the late nineteenth century, at first did not list trash barrels or garbage cans in their catalogues.
In the city, however, goods came in throwaway bottles, boxes, bags, and cans.
Apartment houses had no adjoining barnyards where residents might toss garbage to the hogs.
Cheap ready-to-wear clothing The Shift to the City This chart shows the percentage of total population living in locales with a population of twenty-five hundred or more.
Note the slowing of the cityward trend from 1970 on.
1790 1860 1900 1920 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 5.1% 19.8% 39.7% 51.2% 54.0% 69.9% 73.6% 73.7% 77% 75.2% and swiftly changing fashions pushed old suits and dresses out of the closet and onto the trash heap.
Waste disposal, in short, was an issue new to the urban age.
And the mountains of waste that urbanites generated further testified to a cultural shift away from the virtues of thrift to the conveniences of consumerism.
The jagged skyline of Americas perpendicular civilization could not fully conceal the canker sores of a feverish growth.
Criminals flourished like lice in the teeming asphalt jungles.
Sanitary facilities could not keep pace with the mushrooming population explosion.
Impure water, uncollected garbage, unwashed bodies, and droppings from draft animals enveloped many cities in a satanic stench.
Baltimore was described as smelling like a billion polecats.
The cities were monuments of contradiction.
They represented humanity compressed, remarked one observer, the best and the worst combined, in a strangely composite community.
They harbored merchant princes and miserable paupers, stately banks and sooty factories, green-grassed suburbs and treeless ghettos, towering skyscrapers and stinking tenements.
The glaring contrasts that assaulted the eye in New York reminded one visitor of a lady in ball costume, with diamonds in her ears, and her toes out at the boots.
Worst of all were the human pigsties known as slums.
They seemed to grow ever more crowded, more filthy, and more rat-infested, especially after the perfection in 1879 of the dumbbell tenement.
So named because of the outline of its floor plan, the dumbbell was usually seven or eight stories high, with shallow, sunless, and ill-smelling air shafts providing minimal ventilation.
Several families were sardined onto each floor of the barrackslike structures, and they shared a malodorous toilet in the hall.
In these fetid warrens, conspicuously in New Yorks Lung Block, hundreds of unfortunate urbanites coughed away their lives.
Flophouses abounded where the half-starved and unemployed might sleep for a few cents on verminous mattresses.
Small wonder that slum dwellers strove mightily to escape their wretched surroundingsas many of them did.
The slums remained foul places, inhabited by successive waves of newcomers.
To a remarkable degree hard-working people moved up and out of them.
But although they escaped the old ghetto, they generally resettled in other urban neighborhoods alongside people of the same ethnicity or religion.
The wealthiest left the cities altogether and headed for the semirural suburbs.
These leafy bedroom communities eventually ringed  the brick-and-concrete cities with a greenbelt of  affluence.
C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 The powerful pull of the American urban magnet was felt even in faraway Europe.
A brightly colored stream of immigrants continued to pour in from the old mother continent.
In each of the three decades from the 1850s through the 1870s, more than 2 million migrants had stepped onto Americas shores.
By the 1880s the stream had swelled to a rushing torrent, as more than 5 million cascaded into the country.
A new high for a single year was reached in 1882, when 788,992 arrivedor more than 2,100 a day.
Until the 1880s most immigrants had come  from the British Isles and western Europe, chiefly Germany and Scandinavia.
They were typically fairskinned Anglo-Saxon and Teutonic types, and they were usually Protestant, except for the Catholic Irish and many Catholic Germans.
Many of them boasted a comparatively high rate of literacy and were accustomed to some kind of representative government.
Their Old Country ways of life were such that they fitted relatively easily into American society, especially when they took up farming, as many did.
But in the 1880s, the character of the immigrant stream changed drastically.
The so-called New Immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe.
Among them were Italians, Croats, Slovaks, Greeks, and Poles; many of them worshiped in orthodox churches or synagogues.
They came from countries with little history of democratic government, where people had grown accustomed to cringing before despotism and where opportunities for advancement were few.
Largely illiterate and impoverished, most new immigrants preferred to seek industrial jobs in jam-packed cities rather than move out to farms (see Makers of America: The Italians, pp.
566567).
These new peoples totaled only 19 percent of the inpouring immigrants in the 1880s, but by the first decade of the twentieth century, they constituted an astonishing 66 percent of the total inflow.
They hived together in cities like New York and Chicago, where the Little Italys and Little Annual Immigration, 18601997 The 1989 total includes 478,814 people granted permanent residence status under the amnesty provisions of the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act.
The 1990 total includes 880,372 people granted permanent residence under these provisions.
The peak came in 1991, when 1,123,162 people were affected.
(Source:  relevant years.
) 1,900 1,800 1,700 1,600 1,500 1,400 1,300 1,200 1,100 1,000 900 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 PANIC OF 1873 PROSPERITY ANTIJEWISH POGROMS IN EUROPE POSTWAR FLOOD QUOTAS APPLIED PANIC OF 1893 WORLD WAR I DISPLACED PERSONS QUOTA SYSTEM REVISED INDOCHINA REFUGEES CUBAN AND HAITIAN REFUGEES AMNESTY GRANTED TO CERTAIN ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS 1860 1870 In thousands 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 97 Polands soon claimed more inhabitants than many of the largest cities of the same nationality in the Old World.
Some Americans feared that these New Immigrants would notor could notassimilate to life in their new land, and they began asking if the nation had become a melting pot or a dumping ground.
Why were these bright-shawled and quaint-jacketed strangers hammering on the gates?
In part they left their native countries because Europe seemed to have no room for them.
The population of the Old World was growing vigorously.
It nearly doubled in the century after 1800, thanks in part to abundant supplies of fish and grain from America and to the widespread cultivation in Europe of that humble New World transplant, the potato.
American food imports and the galloping pace of European industrialization shook the peasantry loose from its ancient habitats and customary occupations, creating a vast, footloose army of the unemployed.
Europeans by the millions drained out of the countryside and into European cities.
Most stayed there, but some kept moving and left Europe altogether.
About 60 million Europeans abandoned the Old Continent in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
More than half of them moved to the United States.
But that striking fact should not obscure the important truth that masses of people were already in motion in Europe before they felt the tug of the American magnet.
Immigration to America was, in many ways, a by-product of the urbanization of Europe.
America fever proved highly contagious in Europe.
The United States was often painted as a land of fabulous opportunity in the America letters sent by friends and relatives already transplantedletters that were soiled by the hands of many readers.
We eat here every day, wrote one jubilant Pole, what we get only for Easter in our C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 Article I of the Constitution requires that a census of the American people be taken every ten years, in order to provide a reliable basis for congressional apportionment.
Early censuses gathered little more than basic population numbers, but over the years, the census-takers have collected information on other matters as well, including occupational categories, educational levels, and citizenship status, yielding copious raw data for historical analysis.
The census of 1890 was the first to use punch cards and electric tabulating machines, which greatly expanded the range of data that could be assembled and correlatedthough the basic information was still hand-recorded by individual canvassers who went door-to-door to question household members and fill out the census forms.
Those hand-written forms, as much as the aggregate numbers printed in the final census tally,  can furnish invaluable insights to the historian.
Despite its apparent bureaucratic formality, the form shown here richly details the lives of the residents of a tenement house on New Yorks Lower East Side in 1900.
See in particular the entries for the Goldberg family.
In what ways does this document reflect the great demographic changes that swept late-nineteenth-century America?
What light does it shed on the character of immigrant ghettoes?
What further use might historians make out of information like this?
[native] country.
The land of the free was also blessed with freedom from military conscription and institutionalized religious persecution.
Profit-seeking Americans trumpeted throughout Europe the attractions of the new promised land.
Industrialists wanted low-wage labor, railroads wanted buyers for their land grants, states wanted more population, and steamship lines wanted more human cargo for their holds.
In fact, the ease and cheapness of steam-powered shipping greatly accelerated the transoceanic surge.
As the century lengthened, savage persecutions of minorities in Europe drove many shattered souls to American shores.
In the 1880s the Russians turned violently upon their own Jews, chiefly in the Polish areas.
Tens of thousands of these battered refugees, survivors of centuries of harassment as hated outcasts, fled their burning homes.
They made their way to the seaboard cities of the Atlantic Coast, notably New York.
Jews had experienced city life in Europea circumstance that made them virtually unique among the New Immigrants.
Many of them brought their urban skills of tailoring or shopkeeping to American cities.
Destitute and devout, eastern European Jews were frequently given a frosty reception not only by old-stock Americans but also by those German Jews who had arrived decades earlier and prospered in the United States, some as garment manufacturers who now condescendingly employed their coreligionists as cheap labor.
Many of the immigrants never intended to become Americans in any case.
A large number of them were single men who worked in the United States for several months or years and then returned home with their hard-earned roll of American dollars.
Some 25 percent of the nearly 20 million people who arrived between 1820 and 1900 were birds of passage who eventually returned to their country of origin.
For them the grip of the American magnet was never strong.
C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 So at last I was going to America!
Really, really going, at last!
The boundaries burst.
The arch of heaven soared.
A million suns shone out for every star.
The winds rushed  in from outer space, roaring in my ears, America!
America!
Even those who stayed in America struggled heroically to preserve their traditional culture.
Catholics expanded their parochial-school system and Jews established Hebrew schools.
Foreignlanguage newspapers abounded.
Yiddish theaters, kosher food stores, Polish parishes, Greek restaurants, and Italian social clubs all attested to the desire to keep old ways alive.
Yet time took its toll on these efforts to conserve the customs of the Old World in the New.
The children of the immigrants grew up speaking fluent English, sometimes mocking the broken grammar of their parents.
They often rejected the Old Country manners of their mothers and fathers in their desire to plunge headlong into the mainstream of American life.
Americas government system, nurtured in wideopen spaces, was ill suited to the cement forests of the great cities.
Beyond minimal checking to weed out criminals and the insane, the federal government did virtually nothing to ease the assimilation of immigrants into American society.
State governments, usually dominated by rural representatives, did even less.
City governments, overwhelmed by the sheer scale of rampant urban growth, proved woefully inadequate to the task.
By default, the business of ministering to the immigrants needs fell to the unofficial governments of the urban political machines, led by bosses like New Yorks notorious Boss Tweed.
Taking care of the immigrants was big business, indeed.
Trading jobs and services for votes, a powerful boss might claim the loyalty of thousands of followers.
In return for their support at the polls, the boss provided jobs on the citys payroll, found housing for new arrivals, tided over the needy with gifts of food and clothing, patched up minor scrapes with the law, and helped get schools, parks, and hospitals built in immigrant neighborhoods.
Reformers gagged at this cynical exploitation of the immigrant vote, but the political boss gave valuable assistance that was forthcoming from no other source.
The nations social conscience, slumbering since the antislavery crusade, gradually awakened to the plight of the cities, and especially their immigrant masses.
Prominent in this awakening were several Protestant clergymen, who sought to apply the lessons of Christianity to the slums and factories.
Noteworthy among them was Walter Rauschenbusch, who in 1886 became pastor of a German Baptist church in New York City.
Also conspicuous was Washington Gladden, who took over a Congregational church in Columbus, Ohio, in 1882.
Preaching the social gospel, they both insisted that the churches tackle the burning social issues of the day.
The Sermon on the Mount, they declared, was the science of society, and many social gospelers predicted that socialism would be the logical outcome of Christianity.
These Christian socialists did much to prick calloused middle-class consciences, thus preparing the path for the progressive reform movement after the turn of the century.
One middle-class woman who was deeply dedicated to uplifting the urban masses was Jane Addams (18601935).
Born into a prosperous Illinois family, Addams was one of the first generation of college-educated women.
Upon her graduation she sought other outlets for her large talents than could be found in teaching or charitable volunteer work, then the only permissible occupations for a young woman of her social class.
Inspired by a visit to England, in 1889 she acquired the decaying Hull mansion in Chicago.
There she established Hull House, the most prominent (though not the first) American settlement house.
Soft-spoken but tenacious, Jane Addams became a kind of urban American saint in the eyes of many admirers.
The philosopher William James told her, You utter instinctively the truth we others vainly seek.
She was a broad-gauge reformer who courageously condemned war as well as poverty, and she eventually won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931.
But her pacifism also earned her the enmity of some Americans, including the Daughters of the American Revolution, who choked on her antiwar views and expelled her from membership in their august organization.
Located in a poor immigrant neighborhood of Greeks, Italians, Russians, and Germans, Hull House offered instruction in English, counseling to help newcomers cope with American big-city life, childcare services for working mothers, and cultural activities for neighborhood residents.
Following Jane Addamss lead, women founded settlement houses in other cities as well.
Conspicuous among the houses was Lillian Walds Henry Street Settlement in New York, which opened its doors in 1893. ho were the New Immigrants?
Who were these southern and eastern European birds of passage that flocked to the United States between 1880 and 1920?
Prominent and typical among them were Italians, some 4 million of whom sailed to the United States during the four decades of the New  Immigration.
They came from the southern provinces of their native land, the heel and toe of the Italian boot.
These areas had lagged behind the prosperous, industrial region of northern Italy.
The north had been the seat of earlier Italian glory, as well as the fountainhead of the successful movement to unify the country in 1860.
There industry had been planted and agriculture modernized.
Unification raised hopes of similar progress in the downtrodden south, but it was slow in coming.
Southern Italian peasants tilled their fields without fertilizer or machinery, using hand plows and rickety hoes that had been passed down for generations.
From such disappointed and demeaned conditions, southern Italians set out for the New World.
Almost all of them were young men who intended to spend only a few months in America, stuff their pockets with dollars, and return home.
Almost half of Italian immigrants did indeed repatriateas did comparable numbers of the other New Immigrants, with the conspicuous exception of the Jews, who had fled their native lands to escape religious persecution.
Almost all Italian immigrants sailed through New York harbor, sighting the Statue of Liberty as they debarked from crowded ships.
Many soon moved on to other large cities, but so many remained that in the early years of the twentieth century, more Italians resided in New York than in  the Italian cities of Florence, Venice, and Genoa combined.
Since the immigrant Italians, with few exceptions, had been peasant farmers in the Old Country, the U.S.
government encouraged them to practice their ancestral livelihood here, believing they would more rapidly assimilate in the countryside than in the ethnic enclaves of the cities.
But almost all such ventures failed.
The farmers lacked capital, and they were in any case more interested in earning quick money than in permanently sinking roots.
Although they huddled in the cities, Italian immigrants did not abandon their rural upbringings entirely.
Much to their neighbors consternation, they often kept chickens in vacant lots and raised vegetables in small garden plots nestled between decaying tenement houses.
Those who bade a permanent farewell to Italy clustered in tightly knit communities that boasted opera clubs, Italian-language newspapers, and courts for playing boccia version of lawn bowling imported from the Old Country.
Pizza emerged from the hot wood-burning ovens of these Little Italys, its aroma and flavor wafting their way into the hearts and stomachs of all Americans.
Italians typically earned their daily bread as industrial laborersmost famously as longshoremen and construction workers.
They owed their prominence in the building trades to the padrone system.
The  grants upon arrival and secured jobs for them in New York, Chicago, or wherever there was an immediate demand for industrial labor.
The padrone owed his power to his ability to speak both Italian and English, and he often found homes as well as jobs for the newcomers.
Lacking education, the Italians, as a group, remained in blue-collar jobs longer than some of their fellow New Immigrants.
Many Italians, valuing vocation over schooling, sent their children off to work as early in their young lives as possible.
Before World War I, less than 1 percent of Italian children enrolled in high school.
Over the next fifty years, Italian-Americans and their offspring gradually prospered, moving out of the cities into the more affluent suburbs.
Many served heroically in World War II and availed themselves of the GI Bill to finance the college educations and professional training their immigrant forebears had lacked.
The settlement houses became centers of womens activism and of social reform.
The women of Hull House successfully lobbied in 1893 for an Illinois antisweatshop law that protected women workers and prohibited child labor.
They were led in this case by the black-clad Florence Kelley, a guerrilla warrior in the urban jungle.
Armed with the insights of socialism and endowed with the voice of an actress, Kelley was a lifelong battler for the welfare of women, children, blacks, and consumers.
She later moved to the Henry Street Settlement in New York and served for three decades as general secretary of the National Consumers League.
The pioneering work of Addams, Wald, and Kelley helped blaze the trail that many womenand some menlater followed into careers in the new profession of social work.
These reformers vividly demonstrated the truth that the city was the frontier of opportunity for women, just as the wilderness had been for men.
The urban frontier opened new possibilities for women.
More than a million women joined the work force in the single decade of the 1890s.
Strict social codes prescribed which women might work and what jobs they might hold.
Because employment for wives and mothers was considered taboo, the vast majority of working women were single.
Their jobs depended on their race, ethnicity, and class.
Black women had few opportunities beyond domestic service.
White-collar jobs as social workers, secretaries, department store clerks, and telephone operators were largely reserved for native-born women.
Immigrant women tended to cluster in particular industries, as Jewish women did in the garment trades.
Although hours were often long, pay low, and advancement limited, a job still bought working women some economic and social independence.
After contributing a large share of their earnings to their families, many women still had enough money in their pocketbooks to enter a new urban world of sociability excursions to amusement parks with friends on days off, Saturday night dances with the fellas.
Antiforeignism, or nativism, earlier touched off by the Irish and German arrivals in the 1840s and 1850s, bared its ugly face in the 1880s with fresh ferocity.
The New Immigrants had come for much the same reasons as the Oldto escape the poverty and squalor of Europe and to seek new opportunities in America.
But nativists viewed the eastern and southern Europeans as culturally and religiously exotic hordes and often gave them a rude reception.
The newest newcomers aroused widespread alarm.
Their high birthrate, common among people with a low standard of living and sufficient youth and vigor to pull up stakes, raised worries that the original Anglo-Saxon stock would soon be outbred and outvoted.
Still more horrifying was the prospect that it would be mongrelized by a mixture of inferior southern European blood and that the fairer Anglo-Saxon types would disappear.
One New England writer cried out in anguish, C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 Native Americans voiced additional fears.
They blamed the immigrants for the degradation of urban government.
Trade unionists assailed the alien arrivals for their willingness to work for starvation wages that seemed to them like princely sums and for importing in their intellectual baggage such dangerous doctrines as socialism, communism, and anarchism.
Many business leaders, who had welcomed the flood of cheap manual labor, began to fear that they had embraced a Frankensteins monster.
Antiforeign organizations, reminiscent of the Know-Nothings of antebellum days, were now revived in a different guise.
Notorious among them was the American Protective Association (APA), which was created in 1887 and soon claimed a million members.
In pursuing its nativist goals, the APA urged voting against Roman Catholic candidates for office and sponsored the publication of lustful fantasies about runaway nuns.
Organized labor was quick to throw its growing weight behind the move to choke off the rising tide of foreigners.
Frequently used as strikebreakers, the wage-depressing immigrants were hard to unionize because of the language barrier.
Labor leaders argued, not illogically, that if American industry was entitled to protection from foreign goods, American workers were entitled to protection from foreign laborers.
Observe immigrants .
in their gatherings.
You are struck by the fact that from ten to twenty per cent are hirsute, low-browed, bigfaced persons of obviously low mentality.
They .
clearly belong in skins, in wattled huts at the close of the Great Ice Age.
These oxlike men are descendants of those who always stayed behind.
America is Gods crucible, the great melting pot, where all the races of Europe are melting and re-forming!
Germans and Frenchmen, Irishmen and Englishmen, Jews and Russiansinto the Crucible with you all!
God is making the American!
Congress finally nailed up partial bars against the inpouring immigrants.
The first restrictive  law, passed in 1882, banged the gate shut in the faces of paupers, criminals, and convicts, all of whom had to be returned at the expense of the greedy or careless shipper.
Congress further responded to pained outcries from organized labor when in 1885 it prohibited the importation of foreign workers under contractusually for substandard wages.
In later years other federal laws lengthened the list of undesirables to include the insane, polygamists, prostitutes, alcoholics, anarchists, and people carrying contagious diseases.
A proposed literacy test, long a favorite of nativists because it favored the Old Immigrants over the New, met vigorous opposition.
It was not enacted until 1917, after three presidents had vetoed it on the grounds that literacy was more a measure of opportunity than of intelligence.
The year 1882, in addition to the first federal restrictions on immigration, brought forth a law to bar completely one ethnic groupthe Chinese (see p.
514).
Hitherto America, at least officially, had embraced the oppressed and underprivileged of all races and creeds.
Hereafter the gates would be padlocked against defective undesirablesplus the Chinese.
Four years later, in 1886, the Statue of Liberty arose in New York harbor, a gift from the people of France.
On its base were inscribed the words of Emma Lazarus: C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900                  1,593,000 181,000                        2,753,000 926,000 1,110,000           1,847,000 1,069,000 5,789,000 540,000                              2,928,000 Million 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 18711880 18811890 18911900 19011910 19111920 Leading nations of the Old Immigration: England, Ireland, Germany  Leading nations of the New Immigration: Italy, Austria Hungary, Russia Old and New Immigration (by decade) In the 1970s the sources of immigration to the United States shifted yet again.
The largest number of immigrants came from Latin America (especially Mexico), the next largest from Asia.
The old mother continent of Europe accounted for only 10 percent of immigrants to America as the twenty-first century opened.
(See the chart on p.
1023.
) To many nativists, those noble words described only too accurately the scum washed up by the New Immigrant tides.
Yet the uprooted immigrants, unlike natives lucky enough to have had parents who caught an earlier ship, became American citizens the hard way.
These new immigrants stepped off the boat, many of them full-grown and well muscled, ready to put their shoulders to the nations industrial wheels.
The Republic owes much to these latercomersfor their brawn, their brains, their courage, and the yeasty diversity they brought to American society.
The swelling size and changing character of the urban population posed sharp challenges to American churches, which, like other national institutions, had grown up in the country.
Protestant churches, in particular, suffered heavily from the shift to the city, where many of their traditional doctrines and pastoral approaches seemed irrelevant.
Some of the larger houses of worship, with their stained-glass windows and thundering pipe organs, were tending to become merely sacred diversions or amusements.
Reflecting the wealth of their prosperous parishioners, many of the old-line churches were distressingly slow to raise their voices against social and economic vices.
John D. Rockefeller was a pillar of the Baptist Church, J. Pierpont Morgan of the Episcopal Church.
Trinity Episcopal Church in New York actually owned some of the citys worst slum property.
Cynics remarked that the Episcopal Church had become the Republican party at prayer.
Some religious leaders began to worry that in the age-old struggle between God and the Devil, the Wicked One was registering dismaying gains.
The mounting emphasis was on materialism; too many devotees worshiped at the altar of avarice.
Money was the accepted measure of achievement, and the new gospel of wealth proclaimed that God caused the righteous to prosper.
Into this spreading moral vacuum stepped a new generation of urban revivalists.
Most conspicuous was a former Chicago shoe salesman, Dwight Lyman Moody.
Like many of those to whom he preached, Moody was a country boy who had made good in the big city.
Proclaiming a gospel of kindness and forgiveness, Moody was a modern urban circuit rider who took his message to countless American cities in the 1870s and 1880s.
Clad in a dark business suit, the bearded and rotund Moody held huge audiences spellbound.
When he preached in Brooklyn, special trolley tracks had to be laid to carry the crowds who wanted to hear him.
Moody contributed powerfully to adapting the oldtime religion to the facts of city life.
The Moody Bible Institute founded in Chicago in 1889 continued to carry on his work after his death in 1899.
Simultaneously, the Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths were gaining enormous strength from the New Immigration.
By 1900 the Roman Catholics had increased their lead as the largest single denomination, numbering nearly 9 million communicants.
Roman Catholic and Jewish groups kept the common touch better than many of the leading Protestant churches.
Cardinal Gibbons (18341921), an urban Catholic leader devoted to American unity, was immensely popular with Roman Catholics and Protestants alike.
Acquainted with every president from Johnson to Harding, he employed his liberal sympathies to assist the American labor movement.
By 1890 the variety-loving Americans could choose from 150 religious denominations, 2 of them newcomers.
One was the band-playing Salvation Army, whose soldiers without swords invaded America from England in 1879 and established a beachhead on the street corners.
Appealing frankly to the down-and-outers, the boldly named Salvation Army did much practical good, especially with free soup.
It is said .
that the quality of recent immigration is undesirable.
The time is quite within recent memory when the same thing was said of immigrants who, with their descendants, are now numbered among our best citizens.
The other important new faith was the Church of Christ, Scientist (Christian Science), founded by Mary Baker Eddy in 1879, after she had suffered much ill health.
Preaching that the true practice of Christianity heals sickness, she set forth her views in a book entitled  copies before her death.
A fertile field for converts was found in Americas hurried, nerve-racked, and urbanized civilization, to which Eddy held out the hope of relief from discords and diseases through prayer as taught by Christian Science.
By the time she died in 1910, she had founded an influential church that embraced several hundred thousand devoted worshipers.
Urbanites also participated in a new kind of religious-affiliated organization, the Young Mens and Womens Christian Associations.
The YMCA and the YWCA, established in the United States before the Civil War, grew by leaps and bounds.
Combining physical and other kinds of education with religious instruction, the Ys appeared in virtually every major American city by the end of the nineteenth century.
The old-time religion received many blows from modern trends, including a booming sale of books on comparative religion and on historical criticism as applied to the Bible.
Most unsettling of all was  published in 1859, on the eve of the Civil War, by the English naturalist Charles Darwin.
He set forth in lucid form the sensational theory that humans had slowly evolved from lower forms of lifea theory that was soon summarized to mean the survival of the fittest.
Evolution cast serious doubt on a literal interpretation of the Bible, which relates how God created the heaven and the earth in six days.
The Conservatives, or Fundamentalists, stood firmly on the Scripture as the inspired and infallible Word of God, and they condemned what they thought was the bestial hypothesis of the Darwinians.
The Modernists parted company with the Fundamentalists and flatly refused to accept the Bible in its entirety as either history or science.
This furious battle over Darwinism created rifts in the churches and colleges of the postCivil War era.
Modernist clergymen were removed from their pulpits; teachers of biology who embraced evolution were dismissed from their chairs.
But as time wore on, an increasing number of liberal thinkers were able to reconcile Darwinism with Christianity.
They heralded the revolutionary theory as a newer and grander revelation of the ways of the Almighty.
As one commentator observed, But Darwinism undoubtedly did much to loosen religious moorings and to promote unbelief among the gospel-glutted.
The most bitterly denounced skeptic of the era was a golden-tongued orator, Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll, who lectured C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 widely on Some Mistakes of Moses and Why I Am an Agnostic.
He might have gone far in public life if he had stuck to politics and refrained from attacking orthodox religion by giving hell hell, as he put it.
Public education continued its upward climb.
The ideal of tax-supported elementary schools, adopted on a nationwide basis before the Civil War, was still gathering strength.
Americans were accepting the truism that a free government cannot function successfully if the people are shackled by ignorance.
Beginning about 1870, more and more states were making at least a grade-school education compulsory, and this gain, incidentally, helped check the frightful abuses of child labor.
Spectacular indeed was the spread of high schools, especially by the 1880s and 1890s.
Before the Civil War, private academies at the secondary level were common, and tax-supported high schools were rare, numbering only a few hundred.
But the concept was now gaining impressive support that a high-school education, as well as a grade-school education, was the birthright of every citizen.
By 1900 there were some six thousand high schools.
In addition, free textbooks were being provided in increasing quantities by the taxpayers of the states during the last two decades of the century.
Other trends were noteworthy.
Teacher-training schools, then called normal schools, experienced a striking expansion after the Civil War.
In 1860 there were only twelve of them, in 1910 over three hundred.
Kindergartens, earlier borrowed from Germany, also began to gain strong support.
The New Immigration in the 1880s and 1890s brought vast new strength to the private Catholic parochial schools, which were fast becoming a major pillar of the nations educational structure.
Public schools, though showering benefits on children, excluded millions of adults.
This deficiency was partially remedied by the Chautauqua movement, a successor to the lyceums, which was launched in 1874 on the shores of Lake Chautauqua, in New York.
The organizers achieved gratifying success through nationwide public lectures, often held in tents and featuring well-known speakers, including the witty Mark Twain.
In addition, there were extensive Chautauqua courses of home study, for which 100,000 people enrolled in 1892 alone.
Crowded cities, despite their cancers, generally provided better educational facilities than the old one-room, one-teacher red schoolhouse.
The success of the public schools is confirmed by the falling of the illiteracy rate from 20 percent in 1870 to 10.7 percent in 1900.
Americans were developing a profound faith, often misplaced, in formal education as the sovereign remedy for their ills.
War-torn and impoverished, the South lagged far behind other regions in public education, and African-Americans suffered most severely.
A staggering 44 percent of nonwhites were illiterate in 1900.
Some help came from northern philanthropists, but the foremost champion of black education was an ex-slave, Booker T. Washington, who had slept under a board sidewalk to save pennies for his schooling.
Called in 1881 to head the black normal and industrial school at Tuskegee, Alabama, he began with forty students in a tumbledown shanty.
Undaunted, he taught black students useful trades so that they could gain self-respect and economic security.
Washingtons self-help approach to solving the nations racial problems was labeled accommodationist because it stopped short of directly challenging white supremacy.
Recognizing the depths of southern white racism, Washington avoided the issue of  esced in segregation in return for the right to develophowever modestly and painstakingly the economic and educational resources of the I have studied the Bible from Genesis to Revelation, I have read everything that Bob Ingersoll ever spouted.
And if Bob Ingersoll isnt in hell, God is a liar and the Bible isnt worth the paper it is printed on.
black community.
Economic independence would ultimately be the ticket, Washington believed, to black political and civil rights.
Washingtons commitment to training young blacks in agriculture and the trades guided the curriculum at Tuskegee Institute and made it an ideal place for slave-born George Washington Carver to teach and research.
After Carver joined the faculty in 1896, he became an internationally famous agricultural chemist who provided a much-needed boost to the southern economy by discovering hundreds of new uses for the lowly peanut (shampoo, axle grease), sweet potato (vinegar), and soybean (paint).
Other black leaders, notably Dr.
W. E. B. Du Bois, assailed Booker T. Washington as an Uncle Tom who was condemning their race to manual labor and perpetual inferiority.
Born in Massachusetts, Du Bois was a mixture of African, French, Dutch, and Indian blood (Thank God, no Anglo-Saxon, he would add).
After a determined struggle, he earned a Ph.D.
at Harvard, the first of his race to achieve this goal.
(The honor, I assure you, was Harvards, he said.
) He demanded complete equality for blacks, social as well as economic, and helped to found the National Association for the AdvanceC HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 It is a peculiar sensation, this doubleconsciousness, this sense of always looking at ones self through the eyes of others, of measuring ones self through the eyes of others.
One ever feels his two-nessan American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
ment of Colored People (NAACP) in 1910.
Rejecting Washingtons gradualism and separatism, he demanded that the talented tenth of the black community be given full and immediate access to the mainstream of American life.
An exceptionally skilled historian, sociologist, and poet, he died as a self-exile in Africa in 1963, at the age of ninety-five.
Many of Du Boiss differences with Washington reflected the contrasting life experiences of southern and northern blacks.
Colleges and universities also shot up like lusty young saplings in the decades after the Civil War.
A college education increasingly seemed indispensable in the scramble for the golden apple of success.
The educational battle for women, only partially won before the war, now turned into a rout of the masculine diehards.
Womens colleges such as Vassar were gaining ground, and universities open to both genders were blossoming, notably in the Midwest.
By 1900 every fourth college graduate was a woman.
By the turn of the century as well, the black institutes and academies planted during Reconstruction had blossomed into a crop of southern black colleges.
Howard University in Washington, D.C., Hampton Institute in Virginia, Atlanta University, and numerous others nurtured higher education for blacks until the civil rights movement of the 1960s made attendance at white institutions possible.
The truly phenomenal growth of higher education owed much to the Morrill Act of 1862.
This enlightened law, passed after the South had seceded, provided a generous grant of the public lands to the states for support of education.
Landgrant colleges, most of which became state universities, in turn bound themselves to provide certain services, such as military training.
The Hatch Act of 1887, extending the Morrill Act, provided federal funds for the establishment of agricultural experiment stations in connection with the land-grant colleges.
Private philanthropy richly supplemented federal grants to higher education.
Many of the new industrial millionaires, developing tender social 1870 16,000 9,371 2.0% 1880 24,000 12,896 2.5 1890 44,000 15,539 3.5 1900 95,000 27,410 6.4 1910 156,000 37,199 8.1  8.8 1920 311,000 48,622 8.2  16.8 1930 667,000 122,484 8.4  29.0 1940 1,221,000 186,500 8.6 50.8 1950 1,199,700 432,058 9.3 59.0 1960 1,858,000 392,440 10.5 69.5 1970 2,889,000 792,656 12.2 76.9 1980 3,043,000 929,417 12.5 71.4 1990 2,503,000 1,048,631 12.7 74.2 2000 2,875,000 (est.
) 1,173,000 (est.
) N.A.
N.A.
*People twenty-five years and over.
19101930 based on retrogressions of 1940 data; 1940 was the first year measured (Folger and Nam,  (Sources:  consciences, donated immense fortunes to educational enterprises.
A philanthropist was cynically described as one who steals privately and gives publicly.
In the twenty years from 1878 to 1898, these money barons gave away about $150 million.
Noteworthy among the new private universities of high quality to open were Cornell (1865) and Leland Stanford Junior (1891), the latter founded in memory of the deceased fifteen-year-old only child of a builder of the Central Pacific Railroad.
The University of Chicago, opened in 1892, speedily forged into a front-rank position, owing largely to the lubricant of John D. Rockefellers oil millions.
Rockefeller died at ninety-seven, after having given some $550 million for philanthropic purposes.
Significant also was the sharp increase in professional and technical schools, where modern laboratories were replacing the solo experiments performed by instructors in front of their classes.
Towering among the specialized institutions was Johns Hopkins University, opened in 1876, which maintained the nations first high-grade graduate school.
Several generations of American scholars, repelled by snobbish English cousins and attracted by painstaking Continental methods, had attended German universities.
Johns Hopkins ably carried on the Germanic tradition of profusely footnoted tomes.
Reputable scholars no longer had to go abroad for a gilt-edged graduate degree.
Woodrow Wilson, among others, received his Ph.D.
from Johns Hopkins.
Cut-and-dried, the old classical curriculum in the colleges was on the way out, as the new industrialization brought insistent demands for practical courses and specialized training in the sciences.
The elective system, which permitted students to choose more courses in cafeteria fashion, was gaining popularity.
It received a powerful boost in the 1870s when Dr.
Charles W. Eliot, a vigorous young chemist, became president of Harvard College and embarked upon a lengthy career of educational statesmanship.
Medical schools and medical science after the Civil War were prospering.
Despite the enormous sale of patent medicines and so-called Indian remediesgood for man or beastthe new scientific gains were reflected in improved public health.
Revolutionary discoveries abroad, such as those of the French scientist Louis Pasteur and the English physician Joseph Lister, left their imprint on America.
* The popularity of heavy whiskers waned as the century ended; such hairy adornments were now coming to be regarded as germ traps.
As a result of new health-promoting precautions, including campaigns against public spitting, life expectancy at birth was measurably increased.
One of Americas most brilliant intellectuals, the slight and sickly William James (18421910), served for thirty-five years on the Harvard faculty.
Through his numerous writings, he made a deep mark on many fields.
His  helped to establish the modern discipline of behavioral psychology.
In  the philosophy and psychology of religion.
In his most famous work,  described Americas greatest contribution to the history of philosophy.
The concept of pragmatism held that truth was to be tested, above all, by the practical consequences of an idea, by action rather than theories.
This kind of reasoning aptly expressed the philosophical temperament of a nation of doers.
Books continued to be a major source of edification and enjoyment, for both juveniles and adults.
Bestsellers of the 1880s were generally old favorites like Well-stocked public librariesthe poor persons universitywere making encouraging progress, especially in Boston and New York.
The magnificent Library of Congress building, which opened its doors in 1897, provided thirteen acres of floor space in the largest and costliest edifice of its kind in the world.
A new era was inaugurated by the generous gifts of Andrew Carnegie.
This openhanded Scotsman, book-starved in his youth, contributed $60 million for the construction of public libraries all over the country.
By 1900 there were about nine C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 *From Pasteur came the word  thousand free circulating libraries in America, each with at least three hundred books.
Roaring newspaper presses, spurred by the invention of the Linotype in 1885, more than kept pace with the demands of a word-hungry public.
But the heavy investment in machinery and plant was accompanied by a growing fear of offending advertisers and subscribers.
Bare-knuckle editorials were, to an increasing degree, being supplanted by feature articles and noncontroversial syndicated material.
The day of slashing journalistic giants like Horace Greeley was passing.
Sensationalism, at the same time, was capturing the public taste.
The semiliterate immigrants, combined with straphanging urban commuters, created a profitable market for news that was simply and punchily written.
Sex, scandal, and other human-interest stories burst into the headlines, as a vulgarization of the press accompanied the growth of circulation.
Critics now complained in vain of these presstitutes.
Two new journalistic tycoons emerged.
Joseph Pulitzer, Hungarian-born and near-blind, was a leader in the techniques of sensationalism in St.
Louis and especially with the  use of the colored comic supplements, featuring the Yellow Kid, gave the name  lurid sheets.
A close and ruthless competitor was youthful William Randolph Hearst, who had been expelled from Harvard College for a crude prank.
Able to draw on his California fathers mining millions, he ultimately built up a powerful chain of newspapers, beginning with the  Unfortunately, the overall influence of Pulitzer and Hearst was not altogether wholesome.
Although both championed many worthy causes, both prostituted the press in their struggle for increased circulation; both stooped, snooped, and scooped to conquer.
Their flair for scandal and sensational rumor was happily somewhat offset by the introduction of syndicated material and by the strengthening of the news-gathering Associated Press, which had been founded in the 1840s.
Magazines partially satisfied the public appetite for good reading, notably old standbys like  the most influential journal of all was the liberal and highly intellectual New York  largely by professors, preachers, and publicists as the weekly Day of Judgment.
Launched in 1865 by the Irish-born Edwin L. Godkin, a merciless critic, it crusaded militantly for civil-service reform, honesty in government, and a moderate tariff.
The  attained only a modest circulationabout 10,000 in the nineteenth centurybut Godkin believed that if he could reach the right 10,000 leaders, his ideas through them might reach the 10 millions.
Another journalist-author, Henry George, was an original thinker who left an enduring mark.
Poor in formal schooling, he was rich in idealism and in the milk of human kindness.
After seeing poverty at its worst in India and land-grabbing at its greediest in California, he took pen in hand.
His classic treatise   great enigma of our timesthe association of progress with poverty.
According to George, the pressure of growing population on a fixed supply of land unjustifiably pushed up property values, showering unearned profits on owners of land.
A single 100 percent tax on those windfall profits would eliminate unfair inequalities and stimulate economic growth.
George soon became a most controversial figure.
His single-tax ideas were so horrifying to the propertied classes that his manuscript was rejected by numerous publishers.
Finally brought out in 1879, the book gradually broke into the best-seller lists and ultimately sold some 3 million copies.
George also lectured widely in America, where he influenced thinking about the maldistribution of wealth, and in Britain, where he left an indelible mark on English Fabian socialism.
Edward Bellamy, a quiet Massachusetts Yankee, was another journalist-reformer of remarkable power.
In 1888 he published a socialistic novel, hypnotic sleep, awakens in the year 2000.
He looks backward and finds that the social and economic injustices of 1887 have melted away under an idyllic government, which has nationalized big business to serve the public interest.
To a nation already alarmed by the trust evil, the book had a magnetic appeal and sold over a million copies.
Scores of Bellamy Clubs sprang up to discuss this mild utopian socialism, and they heavily influenced American reform movements near the end of the century.
As literacy increased, so did book reading.
PostCivil War Americans devoured millions of dime novels, usually depicting the wilds of the woolly West.
Paint-bedaubed Indians and quick-triggered gunmen like Deadwood Dick shot off vast quantities of powder, and virtue invariably triumphed.
These lurid paperbacks were frowned upon by parents, but goggle-eyed youths read them in haylofts or in schools behind the broad covers of geography books.
The king of dime novelists was Harlan F. Halsey, who made a fortune by dashing off about 650 novels, often one in a day.
General Lewis Wallacelawyer-soldier-author was a colorful figure.
Having fought with distinction in the Civil War, he sought to combat the prevailing wave of Darwinian skepticism with his novel success, the book sold an estimated 2 million copies in many languages, including Arabic and Chinese, and later appeared on stage and screen.
It was the found in it support for the Holy Scriptures.
An even more popular writer was Horatio (Holy Horatio) Alger, a Puritan-reared New Englander, who in 1866 forsook the pulpit for the pen.
Deeply interested in New York newsboys, he wrote more than a hundred volumes of juvenile fiction that sold over 100 million copies.
His stock formula was that virtue, honesty, and industry are rewarded by success, wealth, and honora kind of survival of the purest, especially nonsmokers, nondrinkers, nonswearers, and nonliars.
Although Algers own bachelor life was criticized, he implanted morality and the conviction that there is always room at the top (especially if one is lucky enough to save the life of the bosss daughter and marry her).
In poetry Walt Whitman was one of the few luminaries of yesteryear who remained active.
Although shattered in health by service as a Civil War nurse, he brought out successiveand purifiedrevisions of his hardy perennial,  write two of the most moving poems in American literature, O Captain!
My Captain!
and When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloomd.
The curious figure of Emily Dickinson, one of Americas most gifted lyric poets, did not emerge until 1886, when she died and her poems were disC HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 and Poverty  Our boasted freedom necessarily involves slavery, so long as we recognize private property in land.
Until that is abolished, Declarations of Independence and Acts of Emancipation are in vain.
So long as one man can claim the exclusive ownership of the land from which other men must live, slavery will exist, and as material progresses on, must grow and deepen!
covered.
A Massachusetts recluse, she wrote over a thousand short lyrics on scraps of paper.
Only two were published during her lifetime, and those without her consent.
As she wrote, Among the lesser poetical lights was a tragic southerner, Sidney Lanier (18421881).
He was oppressed by poverty and ill health, and torn between flute playing and poetry.
Dying young of tuberculosis, he wrote some of his finest poems while afflicted with a temperature of 104 degrees.
He is perhaps best known for The Marshes of Glynn, a poem of faith inspired by the current clash between Darwinism and orthodox religion.
In novel writing the romantic sentimentality of a youthful era was giving way to a rugged realism that reflected more faithfully the materialism of an industrial society.
American authors now turned increasingly to the coarse human comedy and drama of the world around them to find their subjects.
Two Missouri-born authors with deep connections to the South brought altogether new voices to the late-nineteenth-century literary scene.
The daring feminist author Kate Chopin (18511904) wrote candidly about adultery, suicide, and womens ambitions in  in her own day, Chopin was rediscovered by later readers, who cited her work as suggestive of the feminist yearnings that stirred beneath the surface of respectability in the Gilded Age.
Mustachioed Mark Twain (18351910) had leapt to fame with  He teamed up with Charles Dudley Warner in 1873 to write  War politicians and speculators, the book gave a name to an era.
With his scanty formal schooling in frontier Missouri, Twain typified a new breed of American authors in revolt against the elegant refinements of the old New England school of writing.
Christened Samuel Langhorne Clemens, he had served for a time as a Mississippi riverboat pilot and later took his pen name, Mark Twain, from the boatmans cry that meant two fathoms.
After a brief stint in the armed forces, Twain journeyed westward to California, a trip he described, with a mixture of truth and tall tales, in  Many other books flowed from Twains busy pen.
American masterpieces, though initially regarded as trash by snobbish Boston critics.
His later years were soured by bankruptcy growing out of unwise investments, and he was forced to take to the lecture platform and amuse what he called the damned human race.
A great tribute was paid to his self-tutored geniusand to American letters when Englands Oxford University awarded him an honorary degree in 1907.
Journalist, humorist, satirist, and foe of social injustice, he made his most enduring contribution in recapturing frontier realism and humor in the authentic American dialect.
Another author who wrote out of the West and achieved at least temporary fame and fortune was Bret Harte (18361902).
A foppishly dressed New Yorker, Harte struck it rich in California with goldrush stories, especially The Luck of Roaring Camp and The Outcasts of Poker Flat.
Catapulted suddenly into notoriety by those stories, he never again matched their excellence or their popularity.
He lived out his final years in London as little more than a hack writer.
William Dean Howells (18371920), a printers son from Ohio, could boast of little schoolhouse education, but his busy pen carried him high into the literary circles of the East.
In 1871 he became the editor in chief of the prestigious Boston-based with honorary degrees from six universities, including Oxford.
He wrote about ordinary people and about contemporary and sometimes controversial social themes.
the once-taboo subject of divorce;  paint manufacturer caught up in the caste system of Brahmin Boston.
portrays the reformers, strikers, and Socialists in Gilded Age New York.
Stephen Crane (18711900), the fourteenth son of a Methodist minister, also wrote about the seamy underside of life in urban, industrial America.
His a poor prostitute driven to suicide, was too grim to find a publisher.
Crane had to have it printed privately.
He rose quickly to prominence with  ied young Civil War recruit (fresh fish) under fire.
Crane himself had never seen a battle and wrote entirely from the printed Civil War records.
He died of tuberculosis in 1900, when only twenty-nine.
C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 No man has a right to scab so long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a rope long enough to hang his body with.
Judas Iscariot was a gentleman compared with a scab.
For betraying his master, he had character enough to hang himself.
A scab has not.
All modern American literature comes from one book by Mark Twain called  that.
There was nothing before.
There has been nothing as good since.
Henry James (18431916), brother of Harvard philosopher William James, was a New Yorker who turned from law to literature.
Taking as his dominant theme the confrontation of innocent Americans with subtle Europeans, James penned a remarkable number of brilliant novels, including and   the rising feminist movement.
James frequently made women his central characters, exploring their inner reactions to complex situations with a deftness that marked him as a master of psychological realism.
Long resident in England, he became a British subject shortly before his death.
Candid portrayals of contemporary life and social problems were the literary order of the day by the turn of the century.
Jack London (18761916), famous as a nature writer in such books as  fascistic revolution in  Norris (18701902), like London a Californian, wrote   stranglehold of the railroad and corrupt politicians on California wheat ranchers.
A sequel,  (1903), dealt with the making and breaking of speculators on the Chicago wheat exchange.
Two black writers, Paul Laurence Dunbar (18721906) and Charles W. Chesnutt (18581932), brought another kind of realism to late-nineteenthcentury literature.
Dunbar through poetryparticularly his acclaimed  Chesnutt through fictionshort stories in the embraced the use of black dialect and folklore, previously shunned by black authors, to capture the spontaneity and richness of southern black culture.
Conspicuous among the new social novelists rising in the literary firmament was Theodore Dreiser (18711945), a homely, gangling writer from Indiana.
He burst upon the literary scene in 1900 with  a poor working girl in Chicago and New York.
She becomes one mans mistress, then elopes with another, and finally strikes out on her own to make a career on the stage.
The fictional Carries disregard for prevailing moral standards so offended Dreisers publisher that the book was soon withdrawn from circulation, though it later reemerged as an acclaimed American classic.
Victoria Woodhull, who was real flesh and blood, also shook the pillars of conventional morality when she publicly proclaimed her belief in free love in 1871.
Woodhull was a beautiful and eloquent divorce, sometime stockbroker, and tireless feminist propagandist.
Together with her sister, Tennessee Claflin, she published a far-out periodical, shocked respectable society in 1872 when their journal struck a blow for the new morality by charging that Henry Ward Beecher, the most famous preacher of his day, had for years been carrying on an adulterous affair.
Pure-minded Americans sternly resisted these affronts to their moral principles.
Their foremost champion was a portly crusader, Anthony Comstock, who made lifelong war on the immoral.
Armed after 1873 with a federal statutethe notorious Comstock Lawthis self-appointed defender of sexual purity boasted that he had confiscated no fewer than 202,679 obscene pictures and photos; 4,185 boxes of pills, powders, etc., used by abortionists; and 26 obscene pictures, framed on walls of saloons.
His proud claim was that he had driven at least fifteen people to suicide.
The antics of the Woodhull sisters and Anthony Comstock exposed to daylight the battle going on in late-nineteenth-century America over sexual attitudes and the place of women.
Switchboards and typewriters in the booming cities became increasingly the tools of womens liberation.
Economic freedom encouraged sexual freedom, and the new morality began to be reflected in soaring divorce rates, the spreading practice of birth control, and increasingly frank discussion of sexual topics.
By 1913, said one popular magazine, the chimes had struck sex oclock in America.
The new urban environment was hard on families.
Paradoxically, the crowded cities were emotionally isolating places.
Urban families had to go it alone, separated from clan, kin, and village.
As families increasingly became the virtually exclusive arena for intimate companionship and for emotional and psychological satisfaction, they were subjected to unprecedented stress.
Many families cracked under the strain.
The urban era launched the era of divorce.
From the late nineteenth century dates the beginning of the divorce revolution that transformed the United States social landscape in the twentieth century (see the table below).
Urban life also dictated changes in work habits and even in family size.
Not only fathers but mothers and even children as young as ten years old often worked, and usually in widely scattered locations.
On the farm having many children meant having more hands to help with hoeing and harvesting; but in the city more children meant more mouths to feed, more crowding in sardine-tin tenements, and more human baggage to carry in the uphill struggle for social mobility.
Not surprisingly, birthrates were still dropping and family size continued to shrink as the nineteenth century lengthened.
Marriages were being delayed, and more couples learned the techniques of birth control.
The decline in family size in fact affected rural Americans as well as urban dwellers, and oldstock natives as well as new immigrant groups.
C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 1890 570,000 33,461 1 : 17 1900 709,000 55,751 1 : 12 1910 948,166 83,045 1 : 11 1920 1,274,476 170,505 1 : 7 1930 1,126,856 195,961 1 : 5 1940 1,595,879 264,000 1 : 6 1950 1,667,231 385,144 1 : 4.3 1960 1,523,381 393,000 1 : 3.8 1970 2,159,000 708,000 1 : 3 1980 2,390,000 1,189,000 1 : 2 1990 2,443,000 1,182,000 1 : 2 1995 2,336,000 1,169,000 1 : 2 1997 2,383,000 870,000 1 : 2.7 (Source:  Women were growing more independent in the urban environment, and in 1898 they heard the voice of a major feminist prophet, Charlotte Perkins Gilman.
In that year the freethinking and originalminded Gilman published  classic of feminist literature.
A distant relative of Harriet Beecher Stowe and Catharine Beecher, Gilman displayed the restless temperament and reforming zeal characteristic of the remarkable Beecher clan.
Strikingly handsome, she shunned traditional feminine frills and instead devoted herself to a vigorous regimen of physical exercise and philosophical meditation.
In her masterwork of 1898, Gilman called on women to abandon their dependent status and contribute to the larger life of the community through productive involvement in the economy.
Rejecting all claims that biology gave women a fundamentally different character from men, she argued that our highly specialized motherhood is not so advantageous as believed.
She advocated centralized nurseries and cooperative kitchens to facilitate womens participation in the work forceanticipating by more than half a century the day-care centers and convenience-food services of a later day.
Fiery feminists also continued to insist on the ballot.
They had been demanding the vote since before the Civil War, but many high-minded female reformers had temporarily shelved the cause of women to battle for the rights of blacks.
In 1890 militant suffragists formed the National American WASH.
1910 ORE.
1912 CALIF.
1911 NEV.
1914 IDAHO 1896 MONTANA 1914 WYO.
1869 UTAH 1870 COLO.
1893 ARIZ.
1912 ALASKA 1913 S.D.
1918 KANSAS 1912 OKLA.
1918 MICH.
1918 N.Y.
1917 N.D.
MINN.
IOWA NEBR.
ARK.
TEXAS N.M.
MISS.
ALA.
FLA.
TENN.
N.C.
S.C.
W. VA.
OHIO IND.
ILL.
WISC.
N.H.
MASS.
R.I.
CONN.
N.J.
DEL.
HAWAII Equal suffrage     (with date voted) Partial woman suffrage No statewide woman suffrage Woman Suffrage Before the Nineteenth Amendment Dates show when a state or territory adopted woman suffrage.
Note the concentration of womansuffrage states in the West.
Woman Suffrage Association.
Its founders included aging pioneers like Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who had helped organize the first womens rights convention in 1848, and her long-time comrade Susan B. Anthony, the radical Quaker spitfire who had courted jail by trying to cast a ballot in the 1872 presidential election.
By 1900 a new generation of women had taken command of the suffrage battle.
Their most effective leader was Carrie Chapman Catt, a pragmatic and businesslike reformer of relentless dedication.
Significantly, under Catt the suffragists de-emphasized the argument that women deserved the vote as a matter of right, because they were in all respects the equals of men.
Instead Catt stressed the desirability of giving women the vote if they were to continue to discharge their traditional duties as homemakers and mothers in the increasingly public world of the city.
Women had special responsibility for the health of the family and the education of children, the argument ran.
On the farm, women could discharge these responsibilities in the separate sphere of the isolated homestead.
But in the city, they needed a voice on boards of public health, police commissions, and school boards.
By thus linking the ballot to a traditional definition of womens role, suffragists registered encouraging gains as the new century opened, despite continuing showers of rotten eggs and the jeers of male critics who insisted that women were made for loving, not for voting.
Women were increasingly permitted to vote in local elections, particularly on issues related to the schools.
Wyoming Territorylater called the Equality Stategranted the first unrestricted suffrage to women in 1869.
This important breach in the dike once made, many states followed Wyomings example.
Paralleling these triumphs, most of the states by 1890 had passed laws to permit wives to own or control their property after marriage.
City life also fostered the growth of a spate of womens organizations, including the General Federation of Womens Clubs, which counted some 200,000 members in 1900.
The reborn suffrage movement and other womens organizations excluded black women from their ranks.
Fearful that an integrated campaign would compromise its efforts to get the vote, the C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 City housekeeping has failed partly because women, the traditional housekeepers, have not been consulted as to its multiform activities.
The men have been carelessly indifferent to much of the civic housekeeping, as they have been indifferent to the details of the household.
City government demands the help of minds accustomed to detail and a variety of work, to a sense of obligation to the health and welfare of young children, and to a responsibility for the cleanliness and comfort of other people.
National American Woman Suffrage Association limited membership to whites.
Black women, however, created their own associations.
Journalist and teacher Ida B. Wells inspired black women to mount a nationwide antilynching crusade.
She also helped launch the black womens club movement, which culminated in the establishment of the National Association of Colored Women in 1896.
Alarming gains by Demon Rum spurred the temperance reformers to redoubled zeal.
Especially obnoxious to them was the shutter-doored corner saloon, appropriately called the poor mans club.
The  barroom helped keep both him and his family poor.
Liquor consumption had increased during the nerve-racking days of the Civil War, and immigrant groups, accustomed to alcohol in the Old Country, were hostile to restraints.
Whiskey-loving foreigners in Boston would rudely hiss temperance lecturers.
Many tipplers charged, with some accuracy, that temperance reform amounted to a middle-class assault on working-class lifestyles.
The National Prohibition party, organized in 1869, polled a sprinkling of votes in some of the ensuing presidential elections.
Among the favorite songs of these sober souls were Ill Marry No Man If He Drinks, Vote Down the Vile Traffic, and The Drunkards Doom.
Typical was this: Militant women entered the alcoholic arena, notably when the Womans Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) was organized in 1874.
The white ribbon was its symbol of purity; the saintly Frances E. Willardalso a champion of planned parenthood was its leading spirit.
Less saintly was a muscular and mentally deranged Kansas Cyclone, Carrie A. Nation, whose first husband had died of alcoholism.
With her hatchet she boldly smashed saloon bottles and bars, and her hatchetations brought considerable disrepute to the prohibition movement because of the violence of her one-woman crusade.
But rum was now on the run.
The potent AntiSaloon League was formed in 1893, with its members singing The Saloon Must Go and Vote for Cold Water, Boys.
Female supporters sang The Lips That Touch Liquor Must Never Touch Mine.
Statewide prohibition, which had made surprising gains in Maine and elsewhere before the Civil War, was sweeping new states into the dry column.
The great triumphbut only a temporary onecame in 1919, when the national prohibition amendment (Eighteenth) was attached to the Constitution.
Banners of other social crusaders were aloft.
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was created in 1866, after its founder  had witnessed brutality to horses in Russia.
The American Red Cross was launched in 1881, with  the dynamic and diminutive five-foot-tall Clara Barton, an angel of Civil War battlefields, at the helm.
John Adams had anticipated that his generations preoccupation with nation building would allow art to flourish in the future, but the results long proved unspectacular.
Portrait painting continued to appeal, as it had since the colonial era, but many of Americas finest painters made their living abroad.
James Whistler (18341903) did much of his work, including the celebrated portrait of his mother, in England.
This eccentric and quarrelsome Massachusetts Yankee had earlier been dropped from West Point after failing chemistry.
Had silicon been a gas, he later jested, I would have been a major general.
Another gifted portrait painter, likewise self-exiled in England, was John Singer Sargent (18561925).
His flattering but somewhat superficial likenesses of the British nobility were highly prized.
Mary Cassatt, an American in exile in Paris, painted sensitive portrayals of women and children that earned her a place in the pantheon of the French impressionist painters.
Other brush wielders, no less talented, brightened the artistic horizon.
Self-taught George Inness (18251894), who looked like a fanatic with his long hair and piercing gaze, became Americas leading landscapist.
Thomas Eakins (18441916) attained a high degree of realism in his paintings, a quality not appreciated by portrait sitters who wanted their moles overlooked.
Boston-born Winslow Homer (18361910), who as a youth had secretly drawn sketches in school, was perhaps the greatest painter of the group.
Earthily American and largely resistant to foreign influences, he revealed rugged realism and boldness of conception.
His canvases of the sea and of fisherfolk were masterly, and probably no American artist has excelled him in portraying the awesome power of the ocean.
Probably the most gifted sculptor yet produced by America was Augustus Saint-Gaudens (1848 1907).
Born in Ireland of an Irish mother and a French father, he became an adopted American.
Among his most moving works is the Robert Gould Shaw memorial, erected in Boston in 1897.
It depicts Colonel Shaw, a young white Boston Brahmin officer, leading his black troops into battle in the Civil War.
Music, too, was gaining popularity.
America of the 1880s and 1890s was assembling high-quality symphony orchestras, notably in Boston and Chicago.
The famed Metropolitan Opera House of New York was erected in 1883.
In its fabled Diamond Horseshoe, the newly rich, often under the pretense of enjoying the imported singers, would flaunt their jewels, gowns, and furs.
While symphonies and operas were devoted to bringing European music to elite American audiences, new strains of homegrown American music were sprouting in the South.
Black folk traditions like spirituals and ragged music were evolving into the blues, ragtime, and jazz, which would transform American popular music in the twentieth century.
A marvelous discovery was the reproduction of music by mechanical means.
The phonograph, though a squeakily imperfect instrument when invented by the deaf Edison, had by 1900 reached over 150,000 homes.
Americans were rapidly being dosed with canned music, as the sitting room piano increasingly gathered dust.
In addition to skyscraper builder Louis Sullivan, a famous American architect of the age was Henry H. Richardson.
Born in Louisiana and educated at C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 Harvard and in Paris, Richardson settled in Boston and from there spread his immense influence throughout the eastern half of the United States.
He popularized a distinctive, ornamental style that came to be known as Richardsonian.
High-vaulted arches, like those on Gothic churches, were his trademark.
His masterpiece and most famous work was the Marshall Field Building (1885) in Chicago.
Enjoying his success, Richardson was noted for his capacity for champagne, his love of laughter, and the bright yellow vests he sported.
A revival of classical architectural formsand a setback for realismcame with the great Columbian Exposition.
Held in Chicago in 1893, it honored the four-hundredth anniversary of Columbuss first voyage.
This so-called dream of loveliness, which was visited by 27 million people, did much to raise American artistic standards and promote city planning, although many of the spectators were attracted primarily by the contortions of a hootchykootchy dancer, Little Egypt.
Fun and frolic were not neglected by the workaday American.
The pursuit of happiness, heralded in the Declaration of Independence, had by centurys end Sell the cook stove if necessary and come.
You  become a frenzied scramble.
People sought their pleasures fiercely, as they had overrun their continent fiercely.
And now they had more time to play.
Varied diversions beckoned.
As a nation of joiners contemptuous of royalty, Americans inconsistently sought to escape from democratic equality in the aristocratic hierarchies of lodges.
The legitimate stage still flourished, as appreciative audiences responded to the lure of the footlights.
Vaudeville, with its coarse jokes and graceful acrobats, continued to be immensely popular during the 1880s and 1890s, as were minstrel shows in the South, now performed by black singers and dancers rather than by blackfaced whites as in the North before the Civil War.
The circushigh-tented and multiringed finally emerged full-blown.
Phineas T. Barnum, the master showman who had early discovered that the public likes to be humbugged, joined hands with James A. Bailey in 1881 to stage the Greatest Show on Earth.
* Colorful Wild West shows, first performed  in 1883, were even more distinctively American.
Headed by the knightly, goateed, and free-drinking William F.
(Buffalo Bill) Cody, the troupe included war-whooping Indians, live buffalo, and deadeye marksmen.
Among them was the girlish Annie Oakley.
Rifle in hand, she could at thirty paces perforate a tossed-up card half a dozen times before it fluttered to the ground (hence the term  for a punched ticket, later for a free pass).
Baseball, already widely played before the Civil War, was clearly emerging as the national pastime, if not a national mania.
A league of professional players was formed in the 1870s, and in 1888 an all-star baseball team toured the world, using the pyramids as a backstop while in Egypt.
A gladiatorial trend toward spectator sports, rather than participative sports, was exemplified by football.
This rugged game, with its dangerous flying wedge, had become popular well before 1889, when Yaleman Walter C. Camp chose his first All American team.
The Yale-Princeton game of 1893 drew fifty thousand cheering fans, while foreigners jeered that the nation was getting sports on the brain.
Even pugilism, with its long background of bare-knuckle brutality, gained a new and gloved respectability in 1892.
Agile Gentleman Jim Corbett, a scientific boxer, wrestled the world championship from the aging and alcoholic John L. Sullivan, the fabulous Boston Strong Boy.
Two crazes swept the country in the closing decades of the century.
Croquet became all the rage, though condemned by moralists of the naughty nineties because it exposed feminine ankles and promoted flirtation.
The low-framed safety bicycle came to replace the high-seated model.
By 1893 C HAPTER 25 America Moves to the City, 18651900 *Now Ringling Bros.
and Barnum & Bailey Circus.
a million bicycles were in use, and thousands of young women, jokesters remarked, were turning to this new spinning wheel, one that offered freedom, not tedium.
Basketball was invented in 1891 by James Naismith, a YMCA instructor in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Designed as an active indoor sport that could be played during the winter months, it spread rapidly and enjoyed enormous popularity in the next century.
The land of the skyscraper was plainly becoming more standardized, owing largely to the new industrialization.
Although race and ethnicity assigned urban Americans to distinctive neighborhoods and workplaces, to an increasing degree they shared a common popular cultureplaying, reading, shopping, and talking alike.
As the century drew to a close, the explosion of cities paradoxically made Americans more diverse and more similar at the same time.
Charles Darwin publishes  Morrill Act provides public land for higher education American Society for the Prevention of  Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) created Wyoming Territory grants women the right to vote Comstock Law passed Womans Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) organized Chautauqua education movement launched Johns Hopkins University graduate school established Henry George publishes  Dumbbell tenement introduced Mary Baker Eddy establishes Christian Science Salvation Army begins work in America Booker T. Washington becomes head of Tuskegee Institute American Red Cross founded Barnum and Bailey first join to stage the Greatest Show on Earth First immigration-restriction laws passed Brooklyn Bridge completed  Metropolitan Opera House built in New York Mark Twain publishes  Louis Sullivan builds the first skyscraper, in Chicago Linotype invented Statue of Liberty erected in New York harbor American Protective Association (APA) formed Hatch Act supplements Morrill Act Edward Bellamy publishes  American all-star baseball team tours the world Jane Addams founds Hull House in Chicago Moody Bible Institute established in Chicago National American Woman Suffrage Association formed Basketball invented Lillian Wald opens Henry Street Settlement  in New York Anti-Saloon League formed Columbian Exposition held in Chicago Library of Congress opens Charlotte Perkins Gilman publishes Kate Chopin publishes  Theodore Dreiser publishes  National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) founded For further reading, see page A18 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Great West and  the Agricultural Revolution  18651896 F REDERICK J ACKSON T URNER , 1893 W hen the Civil War crashed to a close, the frontier line was still wavering westward.
A long fringe of settlement, bulging outward here and there, ran roughly north through central Texas and on to the Canadian border.
Between this jagged line and the settled areas on the Pacific slope, there were virtually no white people.
The few exceptions were the islands of Mormons in Utah, occasional trading posts and gold camps, and several scattered Spanish-Mexican settlements throughout the Southwest.
Sprawling in expanse, the Great West was a rough square that measured about a thousand miles on each side.
Embracing mountains, plateaus, deserts, and plains, it was the habitat of the Indian, the buffalo, the wild horse, the prairie dog, and the coyote.
Twenty-five years laterthat is, by 1890the entire domain had been carved into states and the four territories of Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and Indian Territory, or Oklahoma.
Pioneers flung themselves greedily on this enormous prize, as if to ravish it.
Probably never before in human experience had so huge an area been transformed so rapidly.
Native Americans numbered about 360,000 in 1860, many of them scattered about the vast grasslands of the trans-Missouri West.
But to their eternal misfortune, the Indians stood in the path of the advancing white pioneers.
An inevitable clash loomed between an acquisitive, industrializing civilization and the Indians highly evolved lifeways, adapted over centuries to the demanding environment of the sparsely watered western plains.
Migration and conflictand sometimes dramatic cultural changewere no strangers in the arid West, even before the whites began to arrive.
The Comanches had driven the Apaches off the central plains into the upper Rio Grande valley in the eighteenth century.
Harried by the Mandans and Chippewas, the Cheyenne had abandoned their villages along the upper reaches of the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers in the century before the Civil War.
The Sioux, displaced from the Great Lakes woodlands in the late eighteenth century, emerged onto the plains to prey upon the Crows, Kiowas, and Pawnees.
Mounted on Spanish-introduced horses, peoples like the Cheyenne and the Sioux transformed themselves within just a few generations from foot-traveling, crop-growing villagers to wideranging nomadic traders and deadly efficient buffalo huntersso deadly that they threatened to extinguish the vast bison herds that had lured them onto the plains in the first place.
When white soldiers and settlers edged onto the plains in the decades just before the Civil War, they accelerated a fateful cycle that exacerbated already fierce enmities among the Indians and ultimately undermined the foundations of Native American culture.
White intruders unwittingly spread cholera, typhoid, and smallpox among the native peoples of the plains, with devastating results.
Equally harmful, whites put further pressure on the steadily shrinking bison population by hunting and by grazing their own livestock on the prairie grasses.
As the once-mammoth buffalo herds dwindled, warfare With the skins [the Indians] build their houses; with the skins they clothe and shoe themselves; from the skins they make ropes and also obtain wool.
From the sinews they make thread, with which they sew their clothing and likewise their tents.
From the bones they shape awls, and the dung they use for firewood, since there is no fuel in all that land.
The bladders serve as jugs and drinking vessels.
They sustain themselves on the flesh of the animals, eating it slightly roasted and sometimes uncooked.
Taking it in their teeth, they pull with one hand; with the other they hold a large flint knife and cut off mouthfuls, swallowing it half chewed, like birds.
They eat raw fat, without warming it.
intensified among the plains tribes for ever-scarcer hunting grounds.
I am traveling all over this country, and am cutting the trees of my brothers, an Arikara Indian told a U.S.
Army officer along the Platte River in 1835.
I am killing their buffalo before my friends arrive so that when they come up, they can find no buffalo.
The federal government tried to pacify the Plains Indians by signing treaties with the chiefs of various tribes at Fort Laramie in 1851 and at Fort Atkinson in 1853.
The treaties marked the beginnings of the reservation system in the West.
They established boundaries for the territory of each tribe and attempted to separate the Indians into two great colonies to the north and south of a corridor of intended white settlement.
But the white treaty makers misunderstood both Indian government and Indian society.
Tribes and chiefs were often fictions of the white imagination, which could not grasp the fact that Native Americans, living in scattered bands, usually recognized no authority outside their immediate family, or perhaps a village elder.
And the nomadic culture of the Plains Indians was utterly alien to the concept of living out ones life in the confinement of a defined territory.
In the 1860s the federal government intensified this policy and herded the Indians into still smaller confines, principally the Great Sioux reservation in Dakota Territory, and Indian Territory in presentday Oklahoma, into which dozens of southern Plains tribes were forced.
The Indians surrendered their ancestral lands only when they had received solemn promises from Washington that they would be left alone and provided with food, clothing, and other supplies.
Regrettably, the federal Indian agents were often corrupt.
They palmed off moth-eaten blankets, spoiled beef, and other defective provisions on the friendless Indians.
One of these cheating officials, on an annual salary of $1,500, returned home after four years with an estimated savings of $50,000.
For more than a decade after the Civil War, fierce warfare between Indians and the U.S.
Army raged in various parts of the West.
Army troops, many of them recent immigrants who had, ironically, fled Europe to avoid military service, met formidable adversaries in the Plains Indians, whose superb horsemanship gave them baffling mobility.
Fully one-fifth of all U.S.
Army personnel on the C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 Tell your people that since the Great Father promised that we should never be removed we have been moved five times.
I think you had better put the Indians on wheels and you can run them about wherever you wish.
frontier were African-Americandubbed Buffalo Soldiers by the Indians, supposedly because of the resemblance of their hair to the bisons furry coat.
The Indian wars in the West were often savage clashes.
Aggressive whites sometimes shot peaceful Indians on sight, just to make sure they would give no trouble.
At Sand Creek, Colorado, in 1864, Colonel J. M. Chivingtons militia massacred in cold blood some four hundred Indians who apparently thought they had been promised immunity.
Women were shot praying for mercy, children had their brains dashed out, and braves were tortured, scalped, and unspeakably mutilated.
Cruelty begot cruelty.
In 1866 a Sioux war party attempting to block construction of the Bozeman Trail to the Montana goldfields ambushed Captain William J. Fettermans command of eighty-one soldiers and civilians in Wyomings Bighorn Mountains.
The Indians left not a single survivor and grotesquely mutilated the corpses.
One troopers face was spitted with 105 arrows.
George Armstrong Custer, the buckskin-clad boy general of Civil War fame, now demoted to colonel and turned Indian fighter, wrote that Fettermans annihilation awakened a bitter feeling toward the savage perpetrators.
The cycle of ferocious warfare intensified.
The Fetterman massacre led to one of the few though short-livedIndian triumphs in the plains wars.
In another Treaty of Fort Laramie, signed in 1868, the government abandoned the Bozeman Trail.
The sprawling Great Sioux reservation was guaranteed to the Sioux tribes.
But in 1874 a new round of warfare with the Plains Indians began when Custer led a scientific expedition into the Black Hills of South Dakota (part of the Sioux reservation) and announced that he had discovered gold.
Hordes of greedy gold-seekers swarmed into the Sioux lands.
The aggrieved Sioux took to the warpath, inspired by the influential and wily Sitting Bull.
Colonel Custers Seventh Cavalry, nearly half of them immigrants, set out to suppress the Indians and to return them to the reservation.
Attacking what turned out to be a superior force of some 2,500 well-armed warriors camped along the Little Bighorn River in present-day Montana, the White Chief with Yellow Hair and his 264 officers and men were completely wiped out in 1876 when two supporting columns failed to come to their rescue.
* But in a series of battles across the northern plains in the ensuing months, the U.S.
Army relentlessly hunted down the Indians who had humiliated Custer.
One band of Nez Perc Indians in northeastern Oregon were goaded into daring flight in 1877, when U.S.
authorities tried to herd them onto a C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 His reply was, bringing his fist down close to my face, Damn any man who sympathizes with Indians.
I told him what pledges were given the Indians.
He replied that he had come to kill Indians, and believed it to be honorable to kill Indians under any and all circumstances.
Indian Wars, 18601890 Surrendering in 1877, Chief Joseph of the Nez Perc declared, Our chiefs  are killed.
The old men are all dead.
The little children are freezing to death.
I want to have time to look for my children.
Hear me, my chiefs.
My heart is sick and sad.
From where the sun now stands  I will fight no more forever.
*When whites wiped out Indians, the engagement (in white history books) was usually a battle; when Indians wiped out whites, it was a massacre.
Strategy when practiced by Indians was treachery.
reservation.
Chief Joseph finally surrendered his breakaway band of some seven hundred Indians after a tortuous, seventeen-hundred-mile, threemonth trek across the Continental Divide toward Canada.
There Joseph hoped to rendezvous with Sitting Bull, who had taken refuge north of the border after the Battle of Little Bighorn.
Betrayed into believing they would be returned to their ancestral lands in Idaho, the Nez Percs instead were sent to a dusty reservation in Kansas, where 40 percent of them perished from disease.
The survivors were eventually allowed to return to Idaho.
Fierce Apache tribes of Arizona and New Mexico were the most difficult to subdue.
Led by Geronimo, whose eyes blazed hatred of the whites, they were pursued into Mexico by federal troops using the sunflashing heliograph, a communication device that impressed the Indians as big medicine.
Scattered remnants of the warriors were finally persuaded to surrender after the Apache women had been exiled to Florida.
The Apaches ultimately became successful farmers in Oklahoma.
This relentless fire-and-sword policy of the whites at last shattered the spirit of the Indians.
The vanquished Native Americans were finally ghettoized on reservations where they could theoretically preserve their cultural autonomy but were in fact compelled to eke out a sullen existence as wards of the government.
Their white masters had at last discovered that the Indians were much cheaper to feed than to fight.
Even so, for many decades they were almost ignored to death.
The taming of the Indians was engineered by a number of factors.
Of cardinal importance was the railroad, which shot an iron arrow through the heart of the West.
Locomotives could bring out unlimited numbers of troops, farmers, cattlemen, sheepherders, and settlers.
The Indians were also ravaged by the white peoples diseases, to which they showed little resistance, and by their firewater, to which they showed almost no resistance.
Above all, the virtual extermination of the buffalo doomed the Plains Indians nomadic way of life.
Tens of millions of buffalodescribed by early Spaniards as hunchback cowsblackened the western prairies when the white Americans first arrived.
These shaggy, lumbering animals were the staff of life for Native Americans (see Makers of America: The Plains Indians, pp.
598599).
Their flesh provided food; their dried dung provided fuel (buffalo chips); their hides provided clothing, lariats, and harnesses.
When the Civil War closed, some 15 million of these meaty beasts were still grazing on the western plains.
In 1868 a Kansas Pacific locomotive had to wait eight hours for a herd to amble across the tracks.
Much of the food supply of the railroad construction gangs came from leathery buffalo steaks.
William Buffalo Bill Codysinewy, telescope-eyed, and a crack shotkilled over 4,000 animals in eighteen months while employed by the Kansas Pacific.
With the building of the railroad, the massacre of the herds began in deadly earnest.
The creatures were slain for their hides, for their tongues or a few other choice cuts, or for sheer amusement.
Sportsmen on lurching railroad trains would lean out the windows and blaze away at the animals to satisfy their lust for slaughter or excitement.
Such wholesale butchery left fewer than a thousand buffalo alive by 1885, and the once-numerous beasts were in danger of complete extinction.
The whole story is a shocking example of the greed and waste that accompanied the conquest of the continent.
By the 1880s the national conscience began to stir uneasily over the plight of the Indians.
Helen Hunt Jackson, a Massachusetts writer of childrens literature, pricked the moral sense of Americans in 1881, when she published  chronicled the sorry record of government ruthlessness and chicanery in dealing with the Indians.
Her later novel  the California Indians, sold some 600,000 copies and further inspired sympathy for the Indians.
Debate seesawed.
Humanitarians wanted to treat the Indians kindly and persuade them thereby to walk the white mans road.
Yet hard-liners insisted on the current policy of forced containment and brutal punishment.
Neither side showed much respect for Native American culture.
Christian reformers, who often administered educational facilities on the reservations, sometimes withheld food to force the Indians to give up their tribal religion and assimilate to white society.
In 1884 these zealous white souls joined with military men in successfully persuading the federal government to outlaw the sacred Sun Dance.
When the Ghost Dance cult later spread to the Dakota Sioux, the army bloodily stamped it out in 1890 at the so-called Battle of Wounded Knee.
In the fighting thus provoked, an estimated two hundred Indian men, women, and children were killed, as well as twentynine invading soldiers.
C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 The Indian Removal Act of 1830 eliminated all Indian land rights east of the  Mississippi River.
The Dawes Act in 1887 changed common tribal lands into individual allotments.
Nearly 90 million acres of tribal land were lost before the act was repealed in 1932.
Since then, through court battles and  federal recognition of old claims, some Indian lands have been restored to the tribes.
Vanishing Lands Once masters of the continent, Native Americans have been squeezed into just 2 percent of U.S.
territory.
(Source: Copyright  2000 by The New York Times Company.
Reprinted by permission.
) The misbegotten offspring of the movement to reform Indian policy was the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887.
Reflecting the forced-civilization views of the reformers, the act dissolved many tribes as legal entities, wiped out tribal ownership of land, and set up individual Indian family heads with 160 free acres.
If the Indians behaved themselves like good white settlers, they would get full title to their holdings, as well as citizenship, in twenty-five years.
The probationary period was later extended, but full  citizenship was granted to all Indians in 1924.
Reservation land not allotted to the Indians under the Dawes Act was to be sold to railroads and white settlers, with the proceeds used by the federal government to educate and civilize the native peoples.
In 1879 the government had already funded the Carlisle Indian School in Pennsylvania, where Native American children, separated from their tribes, were taught English and inculcated with white values and customs.
Kill the Indian and save the man was the school founders motto.
In the 1890s the government expanded its network of Indian boarding schools and sent field matrons to the reservations to teach Native American women the art of sewing and to preach the virtues of chastity and hygiene.
The Dawes Act struck directly at tribal organization and tried to make rugged individualists out of the Indians.
This legislation ignored the inherent reliance of traditional Indian culture on tribally held land, literally pulling the land out from under them.
By 1900 Indians had lost 50 percent of the 156 million acres they had held just two decades earlier.
The forced-assimilation doctrine of the Dawes Act remained the cornerstone of the governments official Indian policy for nearly half a century, until the We took away their country and their means of support, broke up their mode of living, their habits of life, introduced disease and decay among them, and it was for this and against this they made war.
Could anyone expect less?
I see no longer the curling smoke rising from our lodge poles.
I hear no longer the songs of the women as they prepare the meal.
The antelope have gone; the buffalo wallows are empty.
Only the wail of the coyote is heard.
The white mans medicine is stronger than ours.
We are like birds with a broken wing.
he last of the native peoples of North America to bow before the military might of the whites, the Indians of the northern Great Plains long defended their lands and their ways of life against the American cavalry.
After the end of the Indian wars, toward the close of the nineteenth century, the Plains tribes struggled on, jealously guarding their communities against white encroachment.
Crowded onto reservations, subject to ever-changing federal Indian policies, assailed by corrupt settlers and Indian agents, the Plains Indians have nonetheless preserved much of their ancestral culture to this day.
Before Europeans first appeared in North America in the sixteenth century, the vast plain from northern Texas to Saskatchewan was home to some thirty different tribes.
There was no typical Plains Indian; each tribe spoke a distinct language, practiced its own religion, and formed its own government.
When members of different bands met on the prairies, communication depended on a special sign language.
Indians had first trod the arid plains to pursue sprawling herds of antelope, elk, and especially buffalo.
But these early peoples of the plains were not exclusively hunters: the women were expert farmers, coaxing lush gardens of pumpkins, squash, corn, and beans from the dry but fertile soil.
Still, the shaggy pelt and heavy flesh of the buffalo constituted the staff of life on the plains.
Hunted by men, the great bison were butchered by women, who used every part of the beast.
They fashioned horns and hooves into spoons, and intestines into containers.
They stretched sinews into strong bowstrings and wove buffalo hair into ropes.
Meat not immediately eaten was pounded into pemmican thin strips of smoked or sun-dried buffalo flesh mixed with berries and stuffed into rawhide bags.
The nomadic Plains Indians sought what shelter they could in small bands throughout the winter, gathering together in summer for religious ceremonies, socializing, and communal buffalo hunts.
At first these seasonal migrations required arduous loading and carting.
The Indians carried all their possessions or heaped them on wheelless carts called travois, which were dragged by dogstheir only beasts of burden.
Then in the sixteenth century, the mounted Spanish   World.
Their steedssome of them escaping to become mustangs, the wild horses of the American West, and others acquired by the Indians in trade quickly spread over the plains.
The horse revolutionized Indian societies, turning the Plains tribes into efficient hunting machines that promised to banish hunger from the prairies.
But the plains pony also ignited a furious competition for grazing lands, for trade goods, and for ever more horses, so that wars of aggression and of revenge became increasingly bitter and frequent.
The European invasion soon eclipsed the shortlived era of the horse.
After many battles the Plains Indians found themselves crammed together on tiny reservations, clinging with tired but determined fingers to their traditions.
Although much of Plains Indian culture persists to this day, the Indians freeranging way of life has passed into memory.
As Black Elk, an Oglala Sioux, put it, Once we were happy in our own country and we were seldom hungry, for then the two-leggeds and the four-leggeds lived together like relatives, and there was plenty for them and for us.
But then the Wasichus [white people] came, and they made little islands for us .
and always these islands are becoming smaller,  for around them surges the gnawing flood of Wasichus.
Indian Reorganization Act (the Indian New Deal) of 1934 partially reversed the individualistic approach and belatedly tried to restore the tribal basis of Indian life (see p.
790).
Under these new federal policies, defective though they were, the Indian population started to mount slowly.
The total number had been reduced by 1887 to about 243,000the result of bullets, battles, and bacteriabut the census of 2000 counted more than 1.5 million Native Americans, urban and rural.
The conquest of the Indians and the coming of the railroad were life-giving boons to the mining frontier.
The golden gravel of California continued to yield pay dirt, and in 1858 an electrifying discovery convulsed Colorado.
Avid fifty-niners or Pikes Peakers rushed west to rip at the ramparts of the Rockies.
But there were more miners than minerals; and many gold-grubbers, with Pikes Peak or Bust inscribed on the canvas of their covered wagons, creaked wearily back with the added inscription, Busted, by Gosh.
Yet countless bearded fortune seekers stayed on, some to strip away the silver deposits, others to extract nonmetallic wealth from the earth in the form of golden grain.
Fifty-niners also poured feverishly into Nevada in 1859, after the fabulous Comstock Lode had been uncovered.
A fantastic amount of gold and silver, worth more than $340 million, was mined by the Kings of the Comstock from 1860 to 1890.
The scantily populated state of Nevada, child of the Comstock Lode, was prematurely railroaded into the Union in 1864, partly to provide three electoral votes for President Lincoln.
Smaller lucky strikes drew frantic goldand  silver-seekers into Montana, Idaho, and other western states.
Boomtowns, known as Helldorados, sprouted from the desert sands like magic.
Every third cabin was a saloon, where sweat-stained miners drank adulterated liquor (rotgut) in the company of accommodating women.
Lynch law and hempen vigilante justice, as in early California, preserved a crude semblance of order in the towns.
And when the diggings petered out, the gold-seekers decamped, leaving eerily picturesque ghost towns, such as Virginia City, Nevada, silhouetted in the desert.
Begun with a boom, these towns ended with a whimper.
Once the loose surface gold was gobbled up, ore-breaking machinery was imported to smash the gold-bearing quartz.
This operation was so expensive that it could ordinarily be undertaken only by corporations pooling the wealth of stockholders.
Gradually the age of big business came to the mining industry.
Dusty, bewhiskered miners, dishpans in hand, were replaced by the impersonal corporations, with their costly machinery and trained engineers.
The once-independent gold-washer became just another day laborer.
Yet the mining frontier had played a vital role in subduing the continent.
Magnetlike, it attracted population and wealth, while advertising the wonders of the Wild West.
Women as well as men found opportunity, running boardinghouses or working as prostiC HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 tutes.
They won a kind of equality on the rough frontier that earned them the vote in Wyoming (1869), Utah (1870), Colorado (1893), and Idaho (1896) long before their sisters in the East could cast a ballot.
The amassing of precious metals helped finance the Civil War, facilitated the building of railroads, and intensified the already bitter conflict between whites and Indians.
The outpouring of silver and gold enabled the Treasury to resume specie payments  in 1879 and injected the silver issue into American politics.
Silver Senators, representing the thinly peopled acreage states of the West, used their disproportionate influence to promote the interests of the silver miners.
Finally, the mining frontier added to American folklore and literature, as the writings of Bret Harte and Mark Twain so colorfully attest.
When the Civil War ended, the grassy plains of Texas supported several million tough, long-horned cattle.
These scrawny beasts, whose horn spread  sometimes reached eight feet, were killed primarily for their hides.
There was no way of getting their meat profitably to market.
The problem of marketing was neatly solved when the transcontinental railroads thrust their iron fingers into the West.
Cattle could now be shipped bodily to the stockyards, and under beef barons like the Swifts and Armours, the highly industrialized meatpacking business sprang into existence as a main pillar of the economy.
Drawing upon the gigantic stockyards at Kansas City and Chicago, the meatpackers could ship their fresh products to the East Coast in the newly perfected refrigerator cars.
A spectacular feeder of the new slaughterhouses was the Long Drive.
Texas cowboys black, white, and Mexicandrove herds numbering from one thousand to ten thousand head slowly over the unfenced and unpeopled plains until they reached a railroad terminal.
The bawling beasts grazed en route on the free government grass.
Favorite terminal points were flyspecked cow towns like Dodge Citythe Bibulous Babylon  of the Frontierand Abilene (Kansas), Ogallala (Nebraska), and Cheyenne (Wyoming).
At Abilene order was maintained by Marshal James B.
(Wild Bill) Hickok, a fabulous gunman who reputedly Pueblo Dodge City Denver Ogallala Abilene Cheyenne Omaha Atchison Topeka Kansas  City NEBRASKA IOWA WYOMING COLORADO NEW MEXICO TEXAS OKLAHOMA KANSAS MO.
ARK.
MEXICO UNIO N P A C I FI C R. R. K AN SA S P A CIFIC R.R .
ATCH I SON, TO PEKA & SAN TA FE R. R .
Cattle Trails killed only in self-defense or in the line of duty and who was fatally shot in the back in 1876, while playing poker.
As long as lush grass was available, the Long Drive proved profitablethat is, to the luckier cattlemen who escaped Indians, stampedes, cattle fever, and other hazards.
From 1866 to 1888, bellowing herds, totaling over 4 million steers, were driven northward from the beef bowl of Texas.
The steer was king in a Cattle Kingdom richly carpeted with grass.
What the Lord giveth, the Lord also can taketh away.
The railroad made the Long Drive, and the railroad unmade the Long Drive, primarily because the locomotives ran both ways.
The same rails that bore the cattle from the open range to the kitchen range brought out the homesteader and the sheepherder.
Both of these intruders, sometimes amid flying bullets, built barbed-wire fences that were too numerous to be cut down by the cowboys.
Furthermore, the terrible winter of 18861887, with blinding blizzards reaching 68 degrees below zero, left thousands of dazed cattle starving and freezing.
Overexpansion and overgrazing likewise took their toll, as the cowboys slowly gave way to plowboys.
The only escape for the stockmen was to make cattle-raising a big business and avoid the perils of overproduction.
Breeders learned to fence their ranches, lay in winter feed, import blooded bulls, and produce fewer and meatier animals.
They also learned to organize.
The Wyoming Stock-Growers Association, especially in the 1880s, virtually controlled the state and its legislature.
This was the heyday of the cowboy.
The equipment of the cowhandfrom shooting irons and ten-gallon hat to chaps and spursserved a useful, not an ornamental, function.
A genuwine guntoting cowpuncher, riding where men were men and smelled like horses, could justifiably boast of his toughness.
These bowlegged Knights of the Saddle, with their colorful trappings and cattle-lulling songs, became part of American folklore.
Many of them, perhaps five thousand, were blacks, who especially enjoyed the newfound freedom of the open range.
Miners and cattlemen created the romantic legend of the West, but it was the sober sodbuster who wrote the final chapter of frontier history.
A fresh C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 day dawned for western farmers with the Homestead Act of 1862.
The new law allowed a settler to acquire as much as 160 acres of land (a quartersection) by living on it for five years, improving it, and paying a nominal fee of about $30.
The Homestead Act marked a drastic departure from previous policy.
Before the act, public land had been sold primarily for revenue; now it was to be given away to encourage a rapid filling of empty spaces and to provide a stimulus to the family farmthe backbone of democracy.
The new law was a godsend to a host of farmers who could not afford to buy large holdings.
During the forty years after its passage, about half a million families took advantage of the Homestead Act to carve out new homes in the vast open stretches.
Yet five times that many families  roads, the land companies, or the states.
The Homestead Act often turned out to be a cruel hoax.
The standard 160 acres, quite adequate in the well-watered Mississippi basin, frequently proved pitifully inadequate on the rain-scarce Great Plains.
Thousands of homesteaders, perhaps two out of three, were forced to give up the one-sided struggle against drought.
Uncle Sam, it was said, bet 160 acres against ten dollars that the settlers could not live on their homesteads for five years.
One of these unsuccessful gambles in Greer County, western Oklahoma, inspired a folk song: Naked fraud was spawned by the Homestead Act and similar laws.
Perhaps ten times more of the public domain wound up in the clutches of landgrabbing promoters than in the hands of bona fide farmers.
Unscrupulous corporations would use dummy homesteadersoften their employees or aliens bribed with cash or a bottle of beerto grab the best properties containing timber, minerals,  and oil.
Settlers would later swear that they had improved the property by erecting a twelve by fourteen dwelling, which turned out to measure twelve by fourteen  WASH.
28.3% ORE.
52.4% CALIF.
44.6% NEV.
92.9% IDAHO 81.4% MONTANA 28.9% WYO.
46.3% UTAH 83.9% COLO.
28.3% ARIZ.
47.2% S.D.
5.7% KANSAS 0.8% OKLA.
1.6% MICH.
12.6% N.Y.
0.7% N.D.
4.2% MINN.
10.5% IOWA 0.9% NEBR.
1.4% MO.
4.7% ARK.
8.2% LA.
2.6% TEXAS 1.3 % N.M.
32.4% MISS.
4.3% ALA.
3.3% GA.
4% FLA.
9% TENN.
3.7% N.C.
8% S.C.
3.7% VA.
6.3%  W. VA.
6.7% PA.
2.1% OHIO 1.3% IND.
1.7% ILL.
2.7% WISC.
10.1% KY.
4.2% ME.
0.8% N.H.
6% VT.
12.7% MASS.
1.2% R.I.
0.3% CONN.
0.2% N.J.
3.1% DEL.
2.2% MD.
2.2% 510% Under 5% Percentage of public lands within each state 2040% 1020% Over 40% Myth and Reality in the West American folklore pictures the western United States as a land of rugged individualists who tamed the wild region with grit and brawn.
The reality is that the federal government is by far the Wests largest landownerand that federal projects, especially dam-building, have done more to shape the region than all the cowboys and farmers put together.
(Source: Center of the American West.
) The railways also played a major role in developing the agricultural West, largely through the profitable marketing of crops.
Some railroad companies induced Americans and European immigrants to buy the cheap lands earlier granted by the government.
The Northern Pacific Railroad at one time had nearly a thousand paid agents in Europe distributing roseate leaflets in various languages.
Shattering the myth of the Great American Desert opened the gateways to the agricultural West even wider.
The windswept prairies were for the most part treeless, and the tough sod had been pounded solid by millions of buffalo hooves.
Pioneer explorers and trappers had assumed that the soil must be sterile, simply because it was not heavily watered and did not support immense forests.
But once the prairie sod was broken with heavy iron plows pulled by four yokes of oxenthe plow that broke the plainsthe earth proved astonishingly fruitful.
Sodbusters poured onto the prairies.
Lacking trees for lumber and fuel, they built homes from the very sod they dug from the ground, and burned corncobs for warmth.
Lured by higher wheat prices resulting from crop failures elsewhere in the world, settlers in the 1870s rashly pushed still farther west, onto the poor, marginal lands beyond the 100th meridian.
That imaginary line, running north to south from the Dakotas through west Texas, separated two climatological regionsa well-watered area to the east, and a semiarid area to the west.
Bewhiskered and onearmed geologist John Wesley Powell, explorer of the Colorado Rivers Grand Canyon and director of the U.S.
Geological Survey, warned in 1874 that beyond the 100th meridian so little rain fell that agriculture was impossible without massive irrigation.
Ignoring Powells advice, farmers heedlessly chewed up the crusty earth in western Kansas, eastern Colorado, and Montana.
They quickly went broke as a six-year drought in the 1880s further desiccated the already dusty region.
Western Kansas lost half its population between 1888 and 1892.
There is no God west of Salina, one hapless homesteader declared.
In the wake of the devastating drought, the new technique of dry farming took root on the plains.
Its methods of frequent shallow cultivation supposedly were adapted to the arid western environment, but over time dry farming created a finely pulverized surface soil that contributed to the notorious Dust Bowl several decades later (see p.
789).
Other adaptations to the western environment were more successful.
Tough strains of wheat, resistant to cold and drought, were imported from Russia and blossomed into billowing yellow carpets.
Wise farmers abandoned corn in favor of sorghum and other drought-resistant grains.
Barbed wire, perfected by Joseph F. Glidden in 1874, solved the problem of how to build fences on the treeless prairies.
Eventually federally financed irrigation projects on a colossal scale, beyond even what John Wesley Powell had dreamedcaused the Great American Desert to bloom.
A century after Powells predictions, arching dams had tamed the Missouri and Columbia Rivers and had so penned up and diverted the canyon-gnawing Colorado that its mouth in the Gulf of California was dry.
More than 45 million acres were irrigated in seventeen western states.
In the long run, the hydraulic engineers had more to do with shaping the modern West than all the trappers, miners, cavalrymen, and cowboys there ever were.
As one engineer boasted, We enjoy pushing rivers around.
The Great West experienced a fantastic growth in population from the 1870s to the 1890s.
A parade of new western states proudly joined the Union.
Boomtown Colorado, offspring of the Pikes Peak C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 .
my circumstances are rather trying.
So much danger attends me on every hand.
A long journey before me, going I know not whither, without mother or sister to attend me, can I expect to survive it all?
in the afternoon we rode thirty-five miles without stopping.
Pretty well tired out, all of us.
Stood it pretty well myself.
The celebrated Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson, author of such enduring classics as  to California in 1879 to rendezvous with his American fiance, Frances Osbourne.
Between New York and San Francisco, Stevenson traveled on the transcontinental railroad line completed just ten years earlier, and he dutifully recorded his impressions of America, the West in particular, as he made his way toward California.
Stevensons account of his trip provides an unusually gifted writers vivid portrait of the trans-Mississippi West at the close of the era of the Indian wars.
Like all travelogues, Stevensons colorful tale may reveal as much about the traveler as it does about the things he saw.
Yet historians frequently make use of such documents to reconstruct the original appearance and texture of places that were once the exotic destinations of adventurous travelers, before they were transformed by the onrush of modernity.
In the passages reproduced here, inspired by the view as Stevensons train passed through Nebraska and Wyoming, what features of the landscape does the author find most remarkable?
How does he portray the railroad?
Source:  .
We were at seathere is no other adequate expressionon the plains of Nebraska.
It was a world almost without a feature; an empty sky, an empty earth; front and back, the line of railway stretched from horizon to horizon, like a cue across a billiard-board; on either hand, the green plain ran till it touched the skirts of heaven.
[G]razing beasts were seen upon the prairie at all degrees of distance and diminution; and now and again we might perceive a few dots beside the railroad which grew more and more distinct as we drew nearer till they turned into wooden cabins, and then dwindled and dwindled in our wake until they melted into their surroundings, and we were once more alone upon the billiard-board.
The train toiled over this infinity like a snail; and being the one thing moving, it was wonderful what huge proportions it began to assume in our regard.
[That] evening we left Laramie [Wyoming].
And yet when day came, it was to shine upon the same broken and unsightly quarter of the world.
Mile upon mile, and not a tree, a bird, or a river.
Only down the long, sterile caons, the train shot hooting and awoke the resting echo.
That train was the one piece of life in all the deadly land; it was the one actor, the one spectacle fit to be observed in this paralysis of man and nature.
And when I think how the railroad has been pushed through this unwatered wilderness and haunt of savage tribes, and now will bear an emigrant for some 12 from the Atlantic to the Golden Gates; how at each stage of the construction, roaring, impromptu cities, full of gold and lust and death, sprang up and then died away again, and are now but wayside stations in the desert; how in these uncouth places pigtailed Chinese pirates worked side by side with border ruffians and broken men from Europe, talking together in a mixed dialect, mostly oaths, gambling, drinking, quarrelling and murdering like wolves; how the plumed hereditary lord of all America heard, in this last fastness, the scream of the bad medicine waggon charioting his foes; and then when I go on to remember that all this epical turmoil was conducted by gentlemen in frock coats, and with a view to nothing more extraordinary than a fortune and a subsequent visit to Paris, it seems to me, I own, as if this railway were the one typical achievement of the age in which we live, as if it brought together into one plot all the ends of the world and all the degrees of social rank, and offered to some great writer the busiest, the most extended, and the most varied subject for an enduring literary work.
gold rush, was greeted in 1876 as the Centennial State.
In 18891890 a Republican Congress, eagerly seeking more Republican electoral and congressional votes, admitted in a wholesale lot six new states: North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming.
The Mormon Church formally and belatedly banned polygamy in 1890, but not until 1896 was Utah deemed worthy of admission.
Only Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Arizona remained to be lifted into statehood from contiguous territory on the mainland of North America.
In a last gaudy fling, the federal government made available to settlers vast stretches of fertile plains formerly occupied by the Indians in the district of Oklahoma (the Beautiful Land).
Scores of overeager and well-armed sooners, illegally jumping the gun, had entered Oklahoma Territory.
They had to be evicted repeatedly by federal troops, who on occasion would shoot the intruders horses.
On April 22, 1889, all was in readiness for the legal opening, and some 50,000 boomers were poised expectantly on the boundary line.
At high noon the bugle shrilled, and a horde of eighty-niners poured in on lathered horses or careening vehicles.
That night a lonely spot on the prairie had mushroomed into the tent city of Guthrie, with over 10,000 people.
By the end of the year, Oklahoma boasted 60,000 inhabitants, and Congress made it a territory.
In 1907 it became the Sooner State.
In 1890a watershed datethe superintendent of the census announced that for the first time in Americas experience, a frontier line was no longer discernible.
All the unsettled areas were now broken into by isolated bodies of settlement.
The closing of the frontier inspired one of the most influential C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 C A N A D A M E X I C O 30 in.
(76 cm) and over 2030 in.
(5176 cm)  1020 in.
(25.551 cm) Less than 10 in.
(25 cm) G R E A T P L A I N S G R E A T B A S I N S IE R R A N E V A D A R O C K Y M O U N T A IN S P A C IF IC C O A S T A L R A N G E W A S H .
O R E .
N E V .
C A L I F .
A R I Z .
C O L O .
U T A H I D A H O W Y O .
M O N T .
N E B R .
K A N S .
O K L A .
T E X A S L A .
A R K .
M O .
I O W A M I N N .
W I S C .
I L L .
I N D .
M I C H .
O H I O K Y .
T E N N .
M I S S .
A L A .
G A .
F L A .
V A .
V A .
P A .
D E L .
M A S S .
V T .
M E .
M D .
C O N N .
Average Annual Precipitation In the Northern Hemisphere, storms usually circle the globe in a westto-east direction.
Much of the life-nourishing water in these storms is dumped as rainfall on the western slopes of the cloud-high Pacific coastal ranges and the Rocky Mountains.
This weather pattern creates deep, dry rain shadows in the Great Basin and in the plains area immediately east of the Rockies.
essays ever written about American historyFrederick Jackson Turners The Significance of the Frontier in American History in 1893.
As the nineteenth century neared its sunset, the westward-tramping American people were disturbed to find that their fabled free land was going or had gone.
The secretary of war had prophesied in 1827 that five hundred years would be needed to fill the West.
But as the nation finally recognized that its land was not inexhaustible, seeds were planted to preserve the vanishing resource.
The government set aside land for national parksfirst Yellowstone in 1872, followed by Yosemite and Sequoia in 1890.
But the frontier was more than a place; it was also a state of mind and a symbol of opportunity.
Its passing ended a romantic phase of the nations internal development and created new economic and psychological problems.
Traditionally footloose, Americans have been notorious for their mobility.
The nations farmers, unlike the peasants of Europe, have seldom remained rooted to their soil.
The land, sold for a profit as settlement closed in, was often the settlers most profitable crop.
Much has been said about the frontier as a safety valve.
The theory is that when hard times came, the unemployed who cluttered the city pavements merely moved west, took up farming, and prospered.
In truth, relatively few city dwellers, at least in the populous eastern centers, migrated to the frontier during depressions.
Most of them did not know how to farm; few of them could raise enough money to transport themselves west and then pay for livestock and expensive machinery.
But the safety-valve theory does have some validity.
Free acreage did lure to the West a host of immigrant farmers who otherwise might have remained in the eastern cities to clog the job markets and to crowd the festering and already overpopulated slums.
And the very  westward migration may have induced urban employers to maintain wage rates high enough to discourage workers from leaving.
But the real safety valve by the late nineteenth century was in western cities like Chicago, Denver, and San Francisco, where failed farmers, busted miners, and displaced easterners found ways to seek their fortunes.
Indeed, after about 1880 the area from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Coast was the most urbanized region in America, measured by the percentage of people living in cities.
U.S.
history cannot be properly understood unless it is viewed in light of the westward-moving experience.
As Frederick Jackson Turner wrote, American history has been in a large degree the history of the colonization of the Great West.
The story of settling and taming the trans-Mississippi West in the late nineteenth century was but the last chapter in the saga of colonizing various American wests since Columbuss dayfrom the West Indies to the Chesapeake shore, from the valleys of the Hudson and Connecticut Rivers to the valleys of the Tennessee and Ohio Rivers.
FRONTIER LINE ENDS 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 Acres 11,000,000 10,000,000 9,000,000 8,000,000 7,000,000 6,000,000 5,000,000 4,000,000 3,000,000 2,000,000 1,000,000 0 Homesteads from the Public Lands (acreage legally transferred to private ownership) (See related map, p.
603.
) And yet the trans-Mississippi West formed a distinct chapter in that saga and retains even to this day much of its uniqueness.
There the Native American peoples made their last and most desperate struggle against colonization, and there most Native Americans live today.
There Anglo culture collided most directly with Hispanic culturethe historic rival of the Anglo-Americans for dominance in the New Worldand the Southwest remains the most Hispanicized region in America.
There America faced across the Pacific to Asia, and there most Asian-Americans dwell today.
There the scale and severity of the environment posed their largest challenges to human ambitions, and there the environment, with its aridity and still-magical emptiness, continues to mold social and political life, and the American imagination, as in no other part of the nation.
And in no other region has the federal government, with its vast landholdings, its subsidies to the railroads, and its massive irrigation projects, played so conspicuous a role in economic and social development.
The westward-moving pioneers and the country they confronted have assumed mythic proportions in the American mind.
They have been immortalized by such writers as Bret Harte, Mark Twain, Helen Hunt Jackson, and Francis Parkman, and by such painters as George Catlin, Frederic Remington, and Albert Bierstadt.
For better or worse, those pioneers planted the seeds of civilization in the immense western wilderness.
The life we live, they dreamed of; the life they lived, we can only dream.
The situation of American farmers, once jacks-andjills-of-all-trades, was rapidly changing.
They had raised their own food, fashioned their own clothing, and bartered for other necessities with neighbors.
Now high prices persuaded farmers to concentrate on growing single cash crops, such as wheat or corn, and use their profits to buy foodstuffs at the general store and manufactured goods in town or by mail order.
The Chicago firm of Aaron Montgomery Ward sent out its first cataloguea single sheetin 1872.
Large-scale farmers, especially in the immense grain-producing areas of the Mississippi Valley, were now both specialists as well as businesspeople.
As cogs in the vast industrial machine, these farmers were intimately tied to banking, railroading, and manufacturing.
They had to buy expensive machinery in order to plant and to harvest their crops.
A powerful steam engine could drag behind it simultaneously the plow, seeder, and harrow.
The speed of harvesting wheat was dramatically increased in the 1870s by the invention of the twine binder and then in the 1880s by the combinethe combined reaper-thresher, which was drawn by twenty to forty horses and which both reaped and bagged the grain.
Widespread use of such costly equipment naturally called for firstclass management.
But the farmers, often unskilled as businesspeople, were inclined to blame the C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 banks and railroads or the volatility of the global marketplace rather than their own shortcomings, for their losses.
This amazing mechanization of agriculture in the postwar years was almost as striking as the mechanization of industry.
In fact, agricultural modernization drove many marginal farmers off the land, thus swelling the ranks of the new industrial work force.
As the rural population steadily decreased, those farmers who remained achieved miracles of production, making America the worlds breadbasket and butcher shop.
The farm was attaining the status of a factory an outdoor grain factory.
Bonanza wheat farms of the MinnesotaNorth Dakota area, for example, were enormous.
By 1890 at least a half-dozen of them were larger than fifteen thousand acres, with communication by telephone from one part to another.
These bonanza farms foreshadowed the gigantic agribusinesses of the next century.
Agriculture was a big business from its earliest days in Californias phenomenally productive (and phenomenally irrigated) Central Valley.
California farms, carved out of giant Spanish-Mexican land grants and the railroads huge holdings, were from the outset more than three times larger than the national average.
The reformer Henry George in 1871 described the Golden State as not a country of farms but a country of plantations and estates.
With the advent of the railroad refrigerator car in the 1880s, California fruit and vegetable crops, raised on sprawling tracts by ill-paid migrant Mexican and Chinese farmlands, sold at a handsome profit in the rich urban markets of the East.
Once the farmers became chained to a one-crop economywheat or cornthey were in the same leaky boat with the southern cotton growers.
As long as prices stayed high, all went well.
But when they skidded in the 1880s, bankruptcy fell like a blight on the farm belts.
The grain farmers were no longer the masters of their own destinies.
They were engaged in one of the American Agriculture in 1900 most fiercely competitive of businesses, for the price of their product was determined in a world market by the world output.
If the wheat fields of Argentina, Russia, and other foreign countries flourished, the price of the farmers grain would fall and American sodbusters would face ruin, as they did in the 1880s and 1890s.
Low prices and a deflated currency were the chief worries of the frustrated farmersNorth, South, and West.
If a family had borrowed $1,000 in 1855, when wheat was worth about a dollar a bushel, they expected to pay back the equivalent of one thousand bushels, plus interest, when the mortgage fell due.
But if they let their debt run to 1890, when wheat had fallen to about fifty cents a bushel, they would have to pay back the price of two thousand bushels for the $1,000 they had borrowed, plus interest.
This unexpected burden struck them as unjust, though their steely-eyed creditors often branded the complaining farmers as slippery and dishonest rascals.
The deflationary pinch on the debtor flowed partly from the static money supply.
There were simply not enough dollars to go around, and as a result, prices were forced down.
In 1870 the currency in circulation for each person was $19.42; in 1890 it was only $22.67.
Yet during these twenty years, business and industrial activity, increasing manyfold, had intensified the scramble for available currency.
The forgotten farmers were caught on a treadmill.
Despite unremitting toil, they operated year after year at a loss and lived off their fat as best they could.
In a vicious circle, their farm machinery increased their output of grain, lowered the price, and drove them even deeper into debt.
Mortgages engulfed homesteads at an alarming rate; by 1890 Nebraska alone reported more than 100,000 farms blanketed with mortgages.
The repeated crash of the sheriff-auctioneers hammer kept announcing to the world that another sturdy American farmer had become landless in a landed nation.
Ruinous rates of interest, running from 8 to 40 percent, were charged on mortgages, largely by agents of eastern loan companies.
The windburned sons and daughters of the sod, who felt that they deserved praise for developing the country, cried out in despair against the loan sharks and the Wall Street octopus.
Farm tenancy rather than farm ownership was spreading like stinkweed.
The trend was especially marked in the sharecropping South, where cotton prices also sank dismayingly.
By 1880 one-fourth of all American farms were operated by tenants.
The United States was ready to feed the world, but under the new industrial feudalism, the farmers were about to sink into a status suggesting Old World serfdom.
Even Mother Nature ceased smiling, as her powerful forces conspired against agriculture.
Mile-wide clouds of grasshoppers, leaving nothing but the mortgage, periodically ravaged prairie farms.
The terrible cotton-boll weevil was also wreaking havoc in the South by the early 1890s.
The good earth was going sour.
Floods added to the waste of erosion, which had already washed the topsoil off millions of once-lush southern acres.
Expensive fertilizers were urgently needed.
A long succession of droughts seared the trans-Mississippi West, beginning in the summer of 1887.
Whole towns were abandoned.
Going home to the wifes folks and In God we trusted, in Kansas we busted were typical laments of many impoverished farmers, as they fled their weather-beaten shacks and sun-baked sod houses.
One irate poet snarled, To add to their miseries, the soil-tillers were gouged by their governmentlocal, state, and national.
Their land was overassessed, and they paid painful local taxes, whereas wealthy easterners could conceal their stocks and bonds in safe-deposit boxes.
High protective tariffs in these years poured C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 The bankers followed us out west; And did in mortgages invest; They looked ahead and shrewdly planned, And soon theyll have our Kansas land.
profits into the pockets of manufacturers.
Farmers, on the other hand, had no choice but to sell  their low-priced products in a fiercely competitive, unprotected world market, while buying high-priced manufactured goods in a protected home market.
The farmers were also farmed by the corporations and processors.
They were at the mercy of the harvester trust, the barbed-wire trust, and the fertilizer trust, all of which could control output and raise prices to extortionate levels.
Middlemen took a juicy cut from the selling price of the goods that the farmers bought, while operators pushed storage rates to the ceiling at grain warehouses and elevators.
In addition, the railroad octopus had the grain growers in its grip.
Freight rates could be so high that the farmers sometimes lost less if they burned their corn for fuel than if they shipped it.
If they raised their voices in protest, the ruthless railroad operators might let their grain spoil in damp places or refuse to provide them with cars when needed.
Farmers still made up nearly one-half the population in 1890, but they were hopelessly disorganized.
The manufacturers and the railroad barons knew how to combine to promote their interests, and so, increasingly, did industrial workers.
But the farmers were by nature independent and individualisticdead set against consolidation or regimentation.
No really effective Carnegie or Gompers arose among them to preach the gospel of economic integration and concentration.
They never did organize successfully to restrict production until forced to by the federal government nearly half a century later, in Franklin Roosevelts New Deal days.
What they did manage to organize was a monumental political uprising.
Agrarian unrest had flared forth earlier, in the Greenback movement shortly after the Civil War.
Prices sagged in 1868, and a host of farmers unsuccessfully sought relief from low prices and high indebtedness by demanding an inflation of the currency with paper money.
The National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandrybetter known as the Grangewas organized in 1867.
Its leading spirit was Oliver H. Kelley, a shrewd and energetic Minnesota farmer then working as a clerk in Washington.
Kelleys first objective was to enhance the lives of isolated farmers through social, educational, and fraternal activities.
Farm men and women, cursed with loneliness in widely separated farmhouses, found the Granges picnics, concerts, and lectures a godsend.
Kelley, a Mason, even found farmers receptive to his mumbo-jumbo of passwords and secret rituals, as well as his fourply hierarchy, ranging (for men) from Laborer to Husbandman and (for women) from Maid to Matron.
The Grange spread like an old-time prairie fire and by 1875 claimed 800,000 members, chiefly in the Midwest and South.
Buzzing with gossip, these calicoed and calloused folk often met in red schoolhouses around potbellied stoves.
The Grangers gradually raised their goals from individual self-improvement to improvement of the farmers collective plight.
In a determined effort to escape the clutches of the trusts, they established cooperatively owned stores for consumers and cooperatively owned grain elevators and warehouses for producers.
Their most ambitious experiment was an attempt to manufacture harvesting machinery, but this venture, partly as a result of mismanagement, ended in financial disaster.
Embattled Grangers also went into politics, enjoying their most gratifying success in the graingrowing regions of the upper Mississippi Valley, chiefly in Illinois, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Minnesota.
There, through state legislation, they strove to regulate railway rates and the storage fees charged by railroads and by the operators of warehouses and grain elevators.
Many of the state courts, notably in Illinois, were disposed to recognize the principle of public control of private business for the general welfare.
A number of the so-called Granger Laws, however, were badly drawn, and they were bitterly fought through the high courts by the well-paid lawyers of the interests.
Following judicial reverses, most severely at the hands of the Supreme Court in the famous  p.
536), the Grangers influence faded.
But their organization has lived on as a vocal champion of farm interests, while brightening rural life with social activities.
Farmers grievances likewise found a vent in the Greenback Labor party, which combined the inflationary appeal of the earlier Greenbackers with a program for improving the lot of labor.
In 1878, the high-water mark of the movement, the Greenback Laborites polled over a million votes and elected fourteen members of Congress.
In the presidential election of 1880, the Greenbackers ran General James B. Weaver, an old Granger who was a favorite of the Civil War veterans and who possessed a remarkable voice and bearing.
He spoke to perhaps a half-million citizens in a hundred or so speeches but polled only 3 percent of the total popular vote.
C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 A striking manifestation of rural discontent  came through the Farmers Alliance, founded in Texas in the late 1870s (see p.
521).
Farmers came together in the Alliance to socialize, but more importantly to break the strangling grip of the railroads and manufacturers through cooperative buying and selling.
Local chapters spread throughout the South and the Great Plains during the 1880s, until by 1890 members numbered more than a million hard-bitten souls.
Unfortunately, the Alliance weakened itself by ignoring the plight of landless tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and farmworkers.
Even more debilitating was the Alliances exclusion of blacks, who counted for nearly half the agricultural population of the South.
In the 1880s a separate Colored Farmers National Alliance emerged to attract black farmers, and by 1890 membership numbered more than 250,000.
The long history of racial division in the South, however, made it difficult for white and black farmers to work together in the same organization.
Out of the Farmers Alliances a new political party emerged in the early 1890sthe Peoples party.
Better known as the Populists, these frustrated farmers attacked Wall Street and the money trust.
They called for nationalizing the railroads, telephones, and telegraph; instituting a graduated income tax; and creating a new federal subtreasurya scheme to provide farmers with loans for crops stored in government-owned warehouses, where they could be held until market prices rose.
They also wanted the free and unlimited coinage of silveryet another of the debtors demands for inflation that echoed continuously throughout the Gilded Age.
Numerous fiery prophets leapt forward to trumpet the Populist cause.
The free coinage of silver struck many Populists as a cure-all, especially after the circulation of an enormously popular pamphlet titled   William Hope Harvey, it was illustrated by clever woodcuts, one of which depicted the gold ogre beheading the beautiful silver maiden.
In fiction parading as fact, the booklet showed how the little professorCoin Harveyoverwhelmed the bankers and professors of economics with his brilliant arguments on behalf of free silver.
Another notorious spellbinder was red-haired Ignatius Donnelly  of Minnesota, three times elected to Congress.
The queen of the Populist calamity howlers was Mary Elizabeth (Mary Yellin) Lease, a tall, athletic woman known as the Kansas Pythoness.
She reportedly demanded that Kansans should raise less corn and more hell.
The big-city  states until we can civilize Kansas.
To many easterners, complaint, not corn, was rural Americas staple crop.
Yet the Populists, despite their oddities, were not to be laughed away.
They were leading a deadly earnest and impassioned campaign to relieve the farmers many miseries.
Smiles faded from Republican and Democratic faces alike as countless thousands of Populists began to sing Good-bye, My Party, Good-bye.
In 1892 the Populists had jolted the traditional parties by winning several congressional seats and polling more than 1 million votes for their presidential candidate, James B. Weaver.
Racial divisions continued to hobble the Populists in the South, but in the West their ranks were swelling.
Could the Peoples party now reach beyond its regional bases in agrarian America, join hands with urban workers, and mount a successful attack on the northeastern citadels of power?
The panic of 1893 and the severe ensuing depression strengthened the Populists argument that farmers and laborers alike were being victimized by an oppressive economic and political system.
Ragged armies of the unemployed began marching to protest their plight.
In the growing hordes of displaced industrial toilers, the Populists saw potential political allies.
The most famous marcher was General Jacob S. Coxey, a wealthy Ohio quarry owner.
He set out for Washington in 1894 with a few score of supporters and a swarm of newspaper reporters.
His platform included a demand that the government relieve unemployment by an inflationary public works program, supported by some $500 million in legal tender notes to be issued by the Treasury.
Coxey himself rode in a carriage with his wife and infant son, appropriately named Legal Tender Coxey, while his tiny army tramped along behind, singing,  The Commonweal Army of Coxeyites finally straggled into the nations capital, but the invasion took on the aspects of a comic opera when General Coxey and his lieutenants were arrested for walking on the grass.
Elsewhere, violent flare-ups accompanied labor protests, notably in Chicago.
Most dramatic was the crippling Pullman strike of 1894.
Eugene V. Debs, a charismatic labor leader, had helped organize the American Railway Union of about 150,000 members.
The Pullman Palace Car Company, which maintained a model town near Chicago for its employees, was hit hard by the depression and cut wages by about one-third, while holding the line on rent for the company houses.
The workers finally struckin some places overturning Pullman cars and paralyzed railway traffic from Chicago to the Pacific coast.
The American Federation of Labor conspicuously declined to support the Pullman strikers, thus enhancing the AF of Ls reputation for respectability even while weakening labors cause by driving a large wedge into the workers ranks.
C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 The turmoil in Chicago was serious but not yet completely out of hand.
At least this was the judgment of Governor John Peter Altgeld of Illinois, a friend of the downtrodden, who had pardoned the Haymarket Square anarchists the year before (see  p.
551).
But U.S.
Attorney General Richard Olney, an archconservative and an exrailroad attorney, urged the dispatch of federal troops.
His legal grounds were that the strikers were interfering with the transit of the U.S.
mail.
President Cleveland supported Olney with the ringing declaration, If it takes the entire army and navy to deliver a postal card in Chicago, that card will be delivered.
To the delight of conservatives, federal troops, bayonets fixed, crushed the Pullman strike.
Debs was sentenced to six months imprisonment for contempt of court because he had defied a federal court injunction to cease striking.
Ironically, the lean labor agitator spent much of his enforced leisure reading radical literature, which led to his later leadership of the socialist movement in  America.
Embittered cries of government by injunction now burst from organized labor.
This was the first time that such a legal weapon had been used conspicuously by Washington to break a strike, and it was all the more distasteful because defiant workers who were held in contempt could be imprisoned without a jury trial.
Signs multiplied that employers were striving to smash labor unions by court action.
Nonlabor elements of the country, including the Populists and other debtors, were likewise incensed.
They saw in the brutal Pullman episode further proof of an unholy alliance between business and the courts.
The smoldering grievances of the long-suffering farmers and the depression-plagued laborers gave ominous significance to the election of 1896.
Conservatives of all stripes feared an impending No strike has ever been lost.
The issue is Socialism versus Capitalism.
I am for Socialism because I am for humanity.
upheaval, while down-and-out husbandmen and discontented workers cast about desperately for political salvation.
Increasingly, monetary policy whether to maintain the gold standard or inflate the currency by monetizing silverloomed as the issue on which the election would turn.
The leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination in 1896 was former congressman William McKinley of Ohio, sponsor of the ill-starred tariff bill of 1890 (see p.
521).
He had established a creditable Civil War record, having risen to the rank of major; he hailed from the electorally potent state of Ohio; and he could point to long years of honorable service in Congress, where he had made many friends with his kindly and conciliatory manner.
As a presidential candidate, McKinley was largely the creature of a fellow Ohioan, Marcus Alonzo Hanna, who had made his fortune in the iron business and now coveted the role of president maker.
I love McKinley, he once said.
As a wholehearted Hamiltonian, Hanna believed that a prime function of government was to aid business.
Honest, earnest, tough, and direct, he became the personification of big industry in politics.
He was often caricatured in cartoons, quite unfairly, as a bloated bully in a loud checkered suit with a dollar sign in each square.
He believed that in some measure prosperity trickled down to the laborer, whose dinner pail was full when business flourished.
Critics assailed this idea as equivalent to feeding the horses in order to feed the sparrows.
The hardheaded Hanna, although something of a novice in politics, organized his preconvention campaign for McKinley with consummate skill  and with a liberal outpouring of his own money.
The convention steamroller, well lubricated with Hannas dollars, nominated McKinley on the first ballot in St.
Louis in June 1896.
The Republican platform cleverly straddled the money question but leaned toward hard-money policies.
It declared for C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 the gold standard, even though McKinleys voting record in Congress had been embarrassingly friendly to silver.
The platform also condemned hard times and Democratic incapacity, while pouring praise on the protective tariff.
Dissension riddled the Democratic camp.
Cleveland no longer led his party.
The depression had driven the last nail into his political coffin.
Dubbed the Stuffed Prophet, he was undeniably the most unpopular man in the country.
Labordebtor groups remembered too vividly his intervention in the Pullman strike, the backstairs Morgan bond deal, and especially his stubborn hard-money policies.
Ultraconservative in finance, Cleveland now looked more like a Republican than a Democrat on the money issue.
Rudderless, the Democratic convention met in Chicago in July 1896, with the silverites lusting for victory.
Shouting insults at the absent Cleveland, the delegates refused, by a suicidal vote of 564 to 357, to endorse their own administration.
They had the enthusiasm and the numbers; all they lacked was a leader.
A new Moses suddenly appeared in the person of William Jennings Bryan of Nebraska.
Then only thirty-six years of age and known as the Boy Orator of the Platte,* he stepped confidently onto the platform before fifteen thousand people.
His masterful presence was set off by a peninsular jaw and ravenblack hair.
He radiated honesty, sincerity, and energy.
The convention-hall setting was made to order for a magnificent oratorical effort.
A hush fell over the delegates as Bryan stood before them.
With an organlike voice that rolled into the outer corners of the huge hall, he delivered a fervent plea for silver.
Rising to supreme heights of eloquence, he thundered, We will answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them: You shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
The Cross of Gold speech was a sensation.
Swept off its feet in a tumultuous scene, the Democratic convention nominated Bryan the next day on the fifth ballot.
The platform demanded inflation through the unlimited coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 ounces of silver to 1 of gold, though the market ratio was about 32 to 1.
This meant that the silver in a dollar would be worth about fifty cents.
Democratic Gold Bugs, unable to swallow Bryan, bolted their party over the silver issue.
A conservative senator from New York, when asked if he was a Democrat still, reportedly replied, Yes, I am a Democrat stillvery still.
The Democratic minority, including Cleveland, charged that the Populistsilverites had stolen both the name and the clothes of their party.
They nominated a lost-cause ticket of their own, and many of them, including Cleveland, not too secretly hoped for a McKinley victory.
The Populists now faced a dilemma, because the Democratic majority had appropriated their main plank16 to 1, that heaven-born ratio.
The bulk of the Populists, fearing a hard-money McKinley victory, endorsed both fusion with the Democrats and Bryan for president, sacrificing their identity in the mix.
Singing The Jolly Silver Dollar of the Dads, they became in effect the Demo-Pop party, though a handful of the original Populists refused to support Bryan and went down with their colors nailed to the mast.
Mark Hanna smugly assumed that he could make the tariff the focus of the campaign.
But Bryan, a dynamo of energy, forced the free-trade issue into the back seat when he took to the stump in behalf of free silver.
Sweeping through 27 states and traveling 18,000 miles, he made nearly 600 speeches36 in one dayand even invaded the East, the enemys country.
Vachel Lindsay caught the spirit of his oratorical orgy: *One contemporary sneered that Bryan, like the Platte River in his home state of Nebraska, was six inches deep and six miles wide at the mouth.
*Reprinted with the permission of Scribner, a Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc., from  Copyright  1920 by Macmillan Publishing Company; copyright renewed 1948 by Elizabeth C. Lindsay.
Free silver became almost as much a religious as a financial issue.
Hordes of fanatical free-silverites hailed Bryan as the messiah to lead them out of  the wilderness of debt.
They sang Well All Have Our Pockets Lined with Silver and No Crown of Thorns, No Cross of Gold.
Bryan created panic among eastern conservatives with his threat of converting their holdings overnight into fifty-cent dollars.
The Gold Bugs responded with their own free and unlimited coinage of verbiage.
They vented their alarm in abusive epithets, ringing from fanatic and madman to traitor and murderer.
In God We Trust, with Bryan We Bust, the Republicans sneered, while one eastern clergyman cried, That platform was made in Hell.
Widespread fear of Bryan and the silver lunacy enabled Dollar Mark Hanna, now chairman of the Republican National Committee, to shine as a money-raiser.
He shook down the trusts and plutocrats and piled up an enormous slush fund for a campaign of educationor of propaganda, depending on ones point of view.
Reminding the voters of Clevelands Democratic panic, Republicans appealed to the belly vote with their prize slogan, McKinley and the Full Dinner Pail.
The McKinleyites amassed the most formidable political campaign chest thus far in American history.
At all levelsnational, state, and localit amounted to about $16 million, as contrasted with about $1 million for the poorer Democrats (roughly 16 to 1).
With some justification, the Bryanites accused Hanna of buying the election and of floating McKinley into the White House on a tidal wave of mud and money.
Bryans cyclonic campaign began to lose steam as the weeks passed.
Fear was probably Hannas strongest ally, as it was Bryans worst enemy.
Republican businesspeople placed contracts with manufacturers, contingent on the election of McKinley.
A few factory owners, with thinly veiled intimidation, paid off their workers and told them not to come to work on Wednesday morning if Bryan won.
Reports also circulated that employers were threatening to pay their employees in fifty-cent pieces, instead of in dolC HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 lars, if Bryan triumphed.
Such were some of the dirty tricks of the Stop Bryan, Save America crusade.
Hannas campaign methods paid off.
On election day McKinley triumphed decisively.
The vote was 271 to 176 in the Electoral College and 7,102,246 to 6,492,559 in the popular election.
Driven by fear and excitement, an unprecedented outpouring of voters flocked to the polls.
McKinley ran strongly in the populous East, where he carried every county of New England, and in the upper Mississippi Valley.
Bryans states, concentrated in the debt-burdened South and the trans-Mississippi West, boasted more acreage than McKinleys but less population.
The free-silver election of 1896 was perhaps the most significant political turning point since Lincolns victories in 1860 and 1864.
Despite Bryans strength in the South and West, the results vividly demonstrated his lack of appeal to the unmortgaged farmer and especially to the eastern urban laborer.
Many wage earners in the East voted for their jobs and full dinner pails, threatened as they were by free silver, free trade, and fireless factories.
Living precariously on a fixed wage, the factory workers had no reason to favor inflation, which was the heart of the Bryanites program.
The Bryan-McKinley battle heralded the advent of a new era in American politics.
At first glance the election seemed to be the age-old story of the underprivileged many against the privileged few, of the indebted backcountry against the wealthier seaboard, of the country against the city, of the agrarians against the industrialists, of Main Street against Wall Street, of the nobodies against the somebodies.
Yet when Bryan made his evangelical appeal to all those supposed foes of the existing social order, not enough of them banded together to form a political majority.
The outcome was instead a resounding victory for big business, the big cities, middle-class values, and financial conservatism.
Bryans defeat marked the last serious effort to win the White House with mostly agrarian votes.
The future of presidential politics lay not on the farms, with their dwindling population, but in the mushrooming cities, with their growing hordes of freshly arriving immigrants.
The smashing Republican victory of 1896 also heralded a Republican grip on the White House for sixteen consecutive yearsindeed, for all but eight of the next thirty-six years.
McKinleys election thus imparted a new character to the American political system.
The long reign of Republican political  dominance that it ushered in was accompanied by diminishing voter participation in elections, the weakening of party organizations, and the fading away of issues like the money question and civilStandard  The hopelessly ignorant and savagely covetous waifs and strays of American civilization voted for Bryan, but the bulk of the solid sense, business integrity, and social stability sided with McKinley.
The nation is to be heartily congratulated.
service reform, which came to be replaced by concern for industrial regulation and the welfare of labor.
Scholars have dubbed this new political era the period of the fourth party system.
* An eminently safe McKinley took the inaugural oath in 1897.
With his impeccable white vest, he seemed never to perspire, even in oppressively muggy Washington.
Though a man of considerable ability, he was an ear-to-the-ground politician who seldom got far out of line with majority opinion.
His cautious, conservative nature caused him to shy away from the flaming banner of reform.
Business was given a free rein, and the trusts, which had trusted him in 1896, were allowed to develop more mighty muscles without serious restraints.
Almost as soon as McKinley took office, the tariff issue, which had played second fiddle to silver in the Battle of 96, quickly forced itself to the fore.
The current Wilson-Gorman law was not raising enough revenue to cover the annual Treasury deficits, and the Republican trusts thought that they had purchased the right to additional tariff protection by their lush contributions to Hannas war chest.
In due course the Dingley Tariff Bill was jammed through the House in 1897, under the pounding gavel of the rethroned Czar Reed.
The C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 *The first party system, marked by doubts about the very legitimacy of parties, embraced the Federalist-Republican clashes of the 1790s and early 1800s.
The second party system took shape after 1828 with the emergence of mass-based politics in the Jacksonian era, and pitted Democrats against Whigs.
The third party system, beginning in 1860, was characterized by the precarious equilibrium between Republicans and Democrats, as well as the remarkably high electoral participation rates that endured from the end of the Civil War to McKinleys election.
The fourth party system is described above.
The fifth party system emerged with Franklin Roosevelts New Deal in the 1930s, initiating a long period of Democratic ascendancy.
Each system, with the conspicuous exception of the fifth, lasted about three and one-half decadesa cyclical regularity that has long intrigued political scientists and historians.
Debate still rages about whether the country passed into a sixth party system with Richard Nixons election in 1968.
WASH.
4 ORE.
4 CALIF.
8      (+ 1 Dem.
) NEV.
3 IDAHO 3 MONTANA 3 WYO.
3 UTAH 3 COLO.
4 ARIZONA TERR.
S.D.
4 KANSAS 10 OKLA.
TERR.
MICH.
14 N.Y.
36 N.D.
3 MINN.
9 IOWA 13 NEBR.
8 MO.
17 ARK.
8 LA.
8 TEXAS 15 NEW MEXICO TERR.
MISS.
9 ALA.
11 GA.
13 FLA.
4 TENN.
12 N.C.
11 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W.VA.
6 PA.
32 OHIO 23 IND.
15 ILL.
24 WISC.
12 KY 12 (+1 Dem.
) ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
15 R.I.
4 CONN.
6 N.J.
10 DEL.
3 MD.
8 IND.
TERR.
McKinleyRepublican BryanDemocratic Presidential Election of 1896  (with electoral vote by state) This election tolled the death knell of the Gilded Age political party system, with its razor-close elections, strong party loyalties, and high voter turnouts.
For years after 1896, Republicans predominated, and citizens showed a declining interest in either joining parties or voting.
proposed new rates were high, but not high enough to satisfy the paunchy lobbyists, who once again descended upon the Senate.
Over 850 amendments were tacked onto the overburdened bill.
The resulting piece of patchwork finally established the average rates at 46.5 percent, substantially higher than the Democratic Wilson-Gorman Act of 1894 and in some categories even higher than the McKinley Act of 1890.
(See the chart in the Appendix.
) Prosperity, long lurking around the corner, began to return with a rush in 1897, the first year of McKinleys term.
The depression of 1893 had run its course, and farm prices rose.
Paint-thirsty midwestern barns blossomed in new colors, and the wheels of industry resumed their hum.
Republican politicians, like crowing roosters believing they caused the sun to rise, claimed credit for attracting the sunlight of prosperity.
With the return of prosperity, the money issue that had overshadowed politics since the Civil War gradually faded away.
The Gold Standard Act of 1900, passed over last-ditch silverite opposition, provided that the paper currency be redeemed freely in gold.
Nature and science gradually provided an inflation that the Gold Bug East had fought so frantically  to prevent.
Electrifying discoveries of new gold deposits in Canadas fabled Klondike, as well as in Alaska, South Africa, and Australia, brought huge quantities of gold onto world markets, as did the perfecting of the cheap cyanide process for extracting gold from low-grade ore.
Moderate inflation thus took care of the currency needs of an explosively expanding nation, as its circulatory system greatly improved.
The tide of silver heresy rapidly receded, and the Popocratic fish were left gasping high and dry on a golden-sanded beach.
New Indian peoples move onto  Great Plains Pikes Peak gold rush Nevada Comstock Lode discovered Homestead Act Sand Creek massacre Nevada admitted to the Union National Grange organized Battle of Little Bighorn Colorado admitted to the Union Nez Perc Indian War Helen Hunt Jackson publishes  Federal government outlaws Indian Sun Dance Local chapters of Farmers Alliance formed Dawes Severalty Act Oklahoma opened to settlement North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming  admitted to the Union Census Bureau declares frontier line ended Emergence of Peoples party (Populists) Battle of Wounded Knee Populist party candidate James B. Weaver polls  more than 1 million votes in presidential  election Frederick Jackson Turner publishes The  Significance of the Frontier in American  History Coxeys Army marches on Washington Pullman strike Utah admitted to the Union McKinley defeats Bryan for presidency Dingley Tariff Act Gold Standard Act Oklahoma admitted to the Union Indians granted U.S.
citizenship Indian Reorganization Act C HAPTER 26 The Great West and the Agricultural Revolution, 18651896 or more than half a century, the Turner thesis dominated historical writing about the West.
In his famous essay of 1893, The Significance of the Frontier in American History, historian Frederick Jackson Turner argued that the frontier experience molded both region and nation.
Not only the West, Turner insisted, but the national character had been uniquely shaped by the westward movement.
Pioneers had brought the raw West into the embrace of civilization.
And the struggle to overcome the hazards of the western wildernessincluding distance, deserts, drought, and Indianshad transformed Turners thesis raised a question that Americans found especially intriguing in 1893.
Just three years earlier, the superintendent of the census declared that the frontier, defined as a zone with little or no settled population, had closed forever.
What new forces, Turner now asked, would shape a distinctive American national character, now that the testing ground of the frontier had been plowed and tamed?
Turners hypothesis that the American character was forged in the western wilderness is surely among the most provocative statements ever made about the formative influences on the nations development.
But as the frontier era recedes ever further into the past, scholars are less persuaded that Turners thesis adequately explains the national character.
American society is still conspicuously different from European and other cultures, even though Turners frontier disappeared more than a century ago.
Modern scholars charge that Turner based his thesis on several questionable assumptions.
Historian David J. Weber, for example, suggests that the line of the frontier did not define the quavering edge of civilization but marked the boundary between diverse cultures, each with its own claims to legitimacy and, indeed, to legitimate possession of the land.
The frontier should therefore be understood not as the place where civilization triumphed over savagery, but as the principal site of interaction between those cultures.
Several so-called New Western historians take this argument still further.
Scholars such as Patricia Nelson Limerick, Richard White, and Donald Worster suggest that the cultural and ecological damage inflicted by advancing civilization must be reckoned with in any final accounting of what the pioneers accomplished.
These same scholars insist that the West did not lose its regional identity after the frontier line was no longer recognizable in 1890.
The West, they argue, is still a unique part of the national mosaic, a region whose history, culture, and identity remain every bit as distinctive as those of New England or the Old South.
But where Turner saw the frontier as the principal shaper of the regions character, the New Western historians emphasize the effects of ethnic and racial confrontation, topography, climate, and the roles of government and big business as the factors that have made the modern West.
The New Western historians thus reject Turners emphasis on the triumphal civilizing of the wilderness.
As they see the matter, European and American settlers did not tame the West, but rather conquered it, by suppressing the Native American and Hispanic peoples who had preceded them into the region.
But those conquests were  less than complete, so the argument goes, and the West therefore remains, uniquely among American regions, an unsettled arena of commingling and competition among those groups.
Moreover, in these accounts the Wests distinctively challenging climate and geography yielded to human habitation not through the efforts of heroic individual pioneers, but only through massive corporateand especially federal governmentinvestments in transportation systems (like the transcontinental railroad) and irrigation projects (like the watering of Californias Central Valley).
Such developments still give western life its special character today.
For further reading, see page A19 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Path of Empire  18901899 D EMOCRATIC N ATIONAL P LATFORM , 1900 I n the years immediately following the Civil War, Americans remained astonishingly indifferent to the outside world.
Enmeshed in struggles over Reconstruction policies and absorbed in efforts to heal the wounds of war, build an industrial economy, make their cities habitable, and settle the sprawling West, most citizens took little interest in international affairs.
But the sunset decades of the nineteenth century witnessed a momentous shift  in U.S.
foreign policy.
Americas new diplomacy reflected the far-reaching changes that were reshaping agriculture, industry, and the social structure.
American statesmen also responded to the intensifying scramble of several other nations for international advantage in the dawning age of empire.
By centurys end America itself would become an imperial power, an astonishing departure from its venerable anticolonial traditions.
Many developments fed the nations ambition for overseas expansion.
Both farmers and factory owners began to look beyond American shores as agricultural and industrial production boomed.
Many Americans believed that the United States had to expand or explode.
Their country was bursting with a new sense of power generated by the robust growth in population, wealth, and productive capacityand it was trembling from the hammer blows of labor violence and agrarian unrest.
Overseas markets might provide a safety valve to relieve those pressures.
Other forces also whetted the popular appetite for overseas involvement.
The lurid yellow press  of Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst described foreign exploits as manly adventures, the kind of dashing derring-do that was the stuff of young boys dreams.
Pious missionaries, inspired by books like the Reverend Josiah Strongs  overseas for new souls to harvest.
Strong trumpeted the superiority of Anglo-Saxon civilization and summoned Americans to spread their religion and their values to the backward peoples.
He cast his seed on fertile ground.
At the same time, aggressive Americans like Theodore Roosevelt and Congressman Henry Cabot Lodge were interpreting Darwinism to mean that the earth belonged to the strong and the fitthat is, to Uncle Sam.
This view was strengthened as latecomers to the colonial scramble scooped up leavings from the banquet table of  earlier diners.
Africa, previously unexplored and mysterious, was partitioned by the Europeans in the 1880s in a pell-mell rush of colonial conquest.
In the 1890s Japan, Germany, and Russia all extorted concessions from the anemic Chinese Empire.
If America was to survive in the competition of modern nation-states, perhaps it, too, would have to become an imperial power.
The development of a new steel navy also focused attention overseas.
Captain Alfred Thayer Mahans book of 1890,  sea was the key to world dominance.
Read by the English, Germans, and Japanese, as well as by his fellow Americans, Mahan helped stimulate the naval race among the great powers that gained momentum around the turn of the century.
Redblooded Americans joined in the demands for a mightier navy and for an American-built isthmian canal between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
Americas new international interest manifested itself in several ways.
As secretary of state, first in the Garfield administration and later in the Harrison administration, James G. Blaine pushed his Big Sister policy.
It aimed to rally the Latin American nations behind Uncle Sams leadership and to open Latin American markets to Yankee traders.
Blaines efforts bore modest fruit in 1889, when he presided over the first Pan-American Conference, held in Washington, D.C.
Although the frock-coated delegates did little more than sketch a vague plan for economic cooperation through reciprocal tariff reduction, they succeeded in blazing the way for a long and increasingly important series of interAmerican assemblages.
A number of diplomatic crises or near-wars also marked the path of American diplomacy in the late 1880s and early 1890s.
The American and German C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 navies nearly came to blows in 1889 over the faraway Samoan Islands in the South Pacific.
The lynching of eleven Italians in New Orleans in 1891 brought America and Italy to the brink of war; the crisis was defused when the United States agreed to pay compensation.
In the ugliest affair, American demands on Chile after the deaths of two American sailors in the port of Valparaiso in 1892 made hostilities between the two countries seem inevitable.
The threat of attack by Chiles modern navy spread alarm on the Pacific Coast, until American power finally forced the Chileans to pay an indemnity.
A simmering argument between the United States and Canada over seal hunting near the Pribilof Islands off the coast of Alaska was resolved by arbitration in 1893.
The willingness of Americans to risk war over such distant and minor disputes demonstrated the aggressive new national mood.
Americas anti-British feeling, which periodically came to a head, flared ominously in 18951896 over Venezuela.
For more than a half-century, the jungle boundary between British Guiana and Venezuela had been in dispute.
The Venezuelans, whose claims on the whole were extravagant, had repeatedly urged arbitration.
But the prospect of a peaceful settlement faded when gold was discovered in the contested area.
President Cleveland, a champion of righteousness and no lover of Britain, at length decided upon a strong protest.
His no less pugnacious secretary of state, Richard Olney, was authorized to present to London a smashing note, which Cleveland later dubbed a twenty-inch gun blast.
Olney declared in effect that the British, by attempting to dominate Venezuela in this quarrel and acquire more territory, were flouting the Monroe Doctrine.
London should therefore submit the dispute to arbitration.
Not content to stop there, Olney haughtily informed the worlds number one naval power that the United A new consciousness seems to have come upon usthe consciousness of strength and with it a new appetite, the yearning to show our strength.
Ambition, interest, land hunger, pride, the mere joy of fighting, whatever it may be, we are animated by a new sensation.
We are face to face with a strange destiny.
The taste of Empire is in the mouth of the people even as the taste of blood is in the jungle.
It means an Imperial policy, the Republic, renascent, taking her place with the armed nations.
To-day the United States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it confines its interposition.
Its infinite resources combined with its isolated position render it master of the situation and practically invulnerable as against any or all other powers.
The VenezuelaBritish Guiana Boundary Dispute Es s e q u ib o R .
B R I T I S H     G U I A N A V E N E Z U E L A B R A Z I L B R A Z I L DUTCH GUIANA SOUTH AMERICA Extreme British claim Extreme Venezuelan claim Final Line States was now calling the tune in the Western Hemisphere.
British officials, unimpressed, took four months to prepare their reply.
Preoccupied elsewhere, they were inclined to shrug off Olneys lengthy salvo as just another twist of the lions tail designed to elicit cheers from Irish-American voters.
When Londons answer finally came, it flatly denied the relevance of the Monroe Doctrine, while no less emphatically spurning arbitration.
In short, said John Bull, the affair was none of Uncle Sams business.
President Clevelandmad clear through, as he put itsent a bristling special message to Congress.
He urged an appropriation for a commission of experts, who would run the line where it ought to go.
Then, he implied, if the British would not accept this rightful boundary, the United States would fight for it.
The entire country, irrespective of political party, was swept off its feet in an outburst of hysteria.
War seemed inevitable, even though Britain had thirty-two warships of the battleship class to only five flying Old Glory.
Fortunately, sober second thoughts prevailed on both sides of the Atlantic.
The British, though vastly annoyed by their upstart cousins, had no real urge to fight.
Canada was vulnerable to yet-to-beraised American armies, and Britains rich merchant marine was vulnerable to American commerce raiders.
The European atmosphere was menacing, for Britains traditional policy of splendid isolation was bringing insecure isolation.
Russia and France were unfriendly, and Germany, under the saberrattling Kaiser Wilhelm II, was about to challenge British naval supremacy.
The German kaiser, blunderingly and unwittingly, increased chances of a peaceful solution to the Venezuelan crisis.
An unauthorized British raiding party of six hundred armed men was captured by the Dutch-descended Boers in South Africa, and Wilhelm forthwith cabled his congratulations to the victors.
Overnight, British anger against America was largely deflected to Germany, and London consented to arbitrate the Venezuelan dispute.
The final decision, ironically, awarded the British the bulk of what they had claimed from the beginning.
C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 America had skated close to the thin ice of a terrible war, but the results on the whole were favorable.
The prestige of the Monroe Doctrine was immensely enhanced.
Europe was irked by Clevelands claim to domination in this hemisphere, but he had made his claim stick.
Many Latin American republics were pleased by the determination of the United States to protect them, and when Cleveland died in 1908, some of them lowered their flags to half-mast.
The chastened British, their eyes fully opened to the European peril, were now determined to cultivate Yankee friendship.
The British inaugurated an era of patting the eagles head, which replaced a century or so of Americas twisting the lions tail.
Sometimes called the Great Rapprochementor reconciliationbetween the United States and Britain, the new Anglo-American cordiality became a cornerstone of both nations foreign policies as the twentieth century opened.
Enchanted Hawaii had early attracted the attention of Americans.
In the morning years of the nineteenth century, the breeze-brushed islands were a way station and provisioning point for Yankee shippers, sailors, and whalers.
In 1820 came the first New England missionaries, who preached the twin blessings of Protestant Christianity and protective calico.
They came to do goodand did well; their children did even better.
In some respects Honolulu took on the earmarks of a typical New England town.
Americans gradually came to regard the Hawaiian Islands as a virtual extension of their own coastline.
The State Department, beginning in the 1840s, sternly warned other powers to keep their grasping hands off.
Americas grip was further tightened in 1875 by a commercial reciprocity agreement and in 1887 by a treaty with the native government guaranteeing priceless naval-base rights at spacious Pearl Harbor.
But trouble, both economic and political, was brewing in the insular paradise.
Sugar cultivation, which had become immensely profitable, went somewhat sour in 1890 when the McKinley Tariff raised barriers against the Hawaiian product.
White planters, mostly Americans, quickly concluded that the best way to overcome the tariff was to annex Hawaii to the United States.
But that ambition was blocked by the strong-willed Queen Liliuokalani, who insisted that native Hawaiians should control the islands.
Desperate whites, though only a tiny The Pacific The enlargements show the Hawaiian Islands and the Samoas, both areas of American imperialistic activity in the late nineteenth century.
Honolulu San Francisco UNITED STATES AUSTRALIA NEW GUINEA NEW ZEALAND TAIWAN PHILIPPINES BORNEO Apia Harbor Pago Pago Harbor 171  GERMAN SAMOA AMERICAN SAMOA 171  minority, organized a successful revolt early in 1893.
It was openly assisted by American troops, who landed under the unauthorized orders of the expansionist American minister in Honolulu.
The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe, he wrote exultantly to his superiors in Washington, and this is the golden hour for the United States to pluck it.
Hawaii, like Texas of earlier years, seemed ready for annexationat least in the eyes of the ruling American whites.
An appropriate treaty was rushed to Washington.
But before it could be railroaded through the Senate, Republican president Harrisons term expired and Democratic president Cleveland came in.
Old Grover, who set great store by national honesty, suspected that his powerful nation had gravely wronged the deposed Queen Liliuokalani.
Cleveland abruptly withdrew the treaty from the Senate early in 1893 and then sent a special investigator to Hawaii.
The subsequent probe revealed the damning fact that a majority of the Hawaiian natives did not favor annexation at all.
But the white revolutionists were firmly in the saddle, and Cleveland could not unhorse them without using armed forcea step American public opinion would not have tolerated.
Although Queen Liliuokalani could not be reinstated, the sugarcoated move for annexation had to be abandoned temporarilyuntil 1898.
The question of annexing Hawaii touched off the first full-fledged imperialistic debate in American experience.
Cleveland was savagely criticized for trying to stem the new Manifest Destiny, and a popular jingle ran, But Clevelands motives, in a day of international land-grabbing, were honorable both to himself and to his country.
The Hawaiian pear continued to ripen for five more years.
Cubas masses, frightfully misgoverned, again rose against their Spanish oppressor in 1895.
The roots of their revolt were partly economic, with partial origins in the United States.
Sugar productionthe backbone of the islands prosperitywas crippled when the American tariff of 1894 restored high duties on the toothsome product.
Driven to desperation, the insurgents now adopted a scorched-earth policy.
They reasoned that if they did enough damage, Spain might be willing to move out.
Or the United States might move in and help the Cubans win their independence.
In pursuance of this destructive strategy, the  dynamited passenger trains.
American sympathies, ever on the side of patriots fighting for freedom, went out to the Cuban underdogs.
Aside from pure sentiment, the United States had an investment stake of about $50 million in Cuba and an annual trade stake of about $100 million.
Moreover, Spanish misrule in Cuba menaced the shipping routes of the West Indies and the Gulf of Mexico, and less directly the future isthmian canal.
Fuel was added to the Cuban conflagration in 1896 with the coming of the Spanish general C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 (Butcher) Weyler.
He undertook to crush the rebellion by herding many civilians into barbed-wire reconcentration camps, where they could not give assistance to the armed  sanitation, these enclosures turned into deadly pestholes; the victims died like dogs.
An outraged American public demanded action.
Congress in 1896 overwhelmingly passed a resolution that called upon President Cleveland to recognize the belligerency of the revolted Cubans.
But as the government of the insurgents consisted of hardly more than a few fugitive leaders, Clevelandan antijingoist and anti-imperialistrefused to budge.
He defiantly vowed that if Congress declared war, the commander in chief would not issue the necessary order to mobilize the army.
Atrocities in Cuba were made to order for the sensational new yellow journalism.
William R. Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer, then engaged in a titanic duel for circulation, attempted to outdo each other with screeching headlines and hair-raising scoops.
Lesser competitors zestfully followed suit.
Where atrocity stories did not exist, they were invented.
Hearst sent the gifted artist Frederic Remington to Cuba to draw sketches, and when the latter reported that conditions were not bad enough to warrant hostilities, Hearst is alleged to have replied, You furnish the pictures and Ill furnish the war.
Among other outrages, Remington depicted Spanish customs officials brutally disrobing and searching an American woman.
Most readers of Hearsts knowing that such tasks were performed by female attendants.
Butcher Weyler was removed in 1897, yet conditions steadily worsened.
There was some talk in Spain of granting the restive island a type of self-government, but such a surrender was so bitterly opposed by many Spaniards in Cuba that they engaged in furious riots.
Early in 1898 Washington sent the battleship  friendly visit but actually to protect and evacuate Americans if a dangerous flare-up should again occur.
This already explosive situation suddenly grew acute on February 9, 1898, when Hearst sensationally headlined a private letter written by the Spanish minister in Washington, Dupuy de Lme.
The indiscreet epistle, which had been stolen from the mails, described President McKinley as an ear-to-theground politician who lacked good faith.
The resulting uproar was so violent that Dupuy de Lme was forced to resign.
A tragic climax came a few days later, on February 15, 1898, when the  in Havana harbor, with a loss of 260 officers and men.
Two investigations of the iron coffin were undertaken, one by U.S.
naval officers, and the other by Spanish officials, whom the Americans would not trust near the wreck.
The Spanish commission stated that the explosion had been internal and presumably accidental; the American commission reported that the blast had been caused by a submarine mine.
Washington, not unmindful of popular indignation, spurned Spanish proposals of arbitration.
Various theories have been advanced as to how the   explanation of all is that the Spanish officials in Cuba were guilty, for they were under the American gun and Spain was far away.
Not until 1976 did Admiral H. G. Rickover, under U.S.
Navy auspices, give what appears to be the final answer.
He presented overwhelming evidence that the initial explosion had resulted from spontaneous combustion in one of the coal bunkers adjacent to a powder magazine.
Ironically, this is essentially what the Spanish commission had deduced in 1898.
But Americans in 1898, now war-mad, blindly accepted the least likely explanation.
Lashed to fury by the yellow press, they leapt to the conclusion that the Spanish government had been guilty of intolerable treachery.
The battle cry of the hour became, Nothing would do but to hurl the dirty Spanish flag from the hemisphere.
The national war fever burned higher, even though American diplomats had already gained Madrids agreement to Washingtons two basic demands: an end to the reconcentration camps and an armistice with Cuban rebels.
The cautious McKinley did not want hostilities.
The hesitant chief executive was condemned by jingoes as Wobbly Willie McKinley, while fight-hungry Theodore Roosevelt reportedly snarled that the white-livered occupant of the White House did not have the backbone of a chocolate clair.
The president, whose shaken nerves required sleeping pills, was even being hanged in effigy.
Many critics did not realize that backbone was needed to stay out of war, not to plunge into it.
McKinleys private desires clashed sharply with opinions now popular with the public.
He did not want hostilities, for he had seen enough bloodshed as a major in the Civil War.
Mark Hanna and Wall C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 The American jingoes .
imagine us capable of the most foul villainies and cowardly actions.
Scoundrels by nature, the American jingoes believe that all men are made like themselves.
What do they know about noble and generous feelings?
We should not in any way heed the jingoes: they are not even worth our contempt, or the saliva with which we might honor them in spitting at their faces.
Street did not want war, for business might be unsettled.
But the public, prodded by the yellow press and the appeals of Cuban exiles in the United States, clamored for a fight.
The president, recognizing the inevitable, finally yielded and gave the people what they wanted.
But public pressures did not fully explain McKinleys course.
He had no faith in Spains promises regarding Cuba; Madrid had spoken them and broken them before.
He was certain that a showdown would have to come sooner or later.
He believed in the democratic principle that the people should rule, and he hesitated to deny Americans what they demandedeven if it was not good for them.
He also perceived that if he stood out against war, the Democrats would make political capital out of his stubbornness.
Bryan might sweep into the presidency two years later under a banner inscribed Free Cuba and Free Silver.
Gold-standard McKinley was a staunch party man, and to him it seemed better to break up the remnants of Spains onceglorious empire than to break up the Grand Old Partyespecially since war seemed inevitable.
On April 11, 1898, McKinley sent his war message to Congress, urging armed intervention to free the oppressed Cubans.
The legislators responded uproariously with what was essentially a declaration of war.
In a burst of self-righteousness, they likewise adopted the hand-tying Teller Amendment.
This proviso proclaimed to the world that when the United States had overthrown Spanish misrule, it would give the Cubans their freedoma declaration that caused imperialistic Europeans to smile skeptically.
The American people plunged into the war lightheartedly, like schoolchildren off to a picnic.
Bands blared incessantly Therell Be a Hot Time in the Old Town Tonight and Hail, Hail, the Gangs All Here, thus leading foreigners to believe that those were national anthems.
But such jubilation seemed premature to European observers.
The regular army, which was commanded by corpulent Civil War oldsters, was unprepared for a war under tropical skies.
It numbered only 2,100 officers and 28,000 men, as compared with some 200,000 Spanish troops in Cuba.
The American navy, at least to transatlantic experts, seemed slightly less powerful than Spains.
European powers, moreover, were generally friendly to their Old World associate.
The only conspicuous exception was the ally-seeking British, who now were ardently wooing their American cousins.
Yet in one important respect, Spains apparent superiority was illusory.
Its navy, though formidable on paper, was in wretched condition.
It labored under the added handicap of having to operate thousands of miles from its home base.
But the new American steel navy, now fifteen years old and ranking about fifth among the fleets of the world, was in fairly good trim, though the war was to lay bare serious defects.
The readiness of the navy owed much to two men: the easygoing navy secretary John D. Long and his bellicose assistant secretary Theodore Roosevelt.
The secretary hardly dared leave his desk for fear that his overzealous underling would stir up a hornets nest.
On February 25, 1898, while Long was away for a weekend, Roosevelt had cabled Commodore George Dewey, commanding the American Asiatic Squadron at Hong Kong, to descend upon Spains Philippines in the event of war.
McKinley subsequently confirmed these instructions, even though an attack in the distant Far East seemed like a strange way to free nearby Cuba.
Dewey carried out his orders magnificently on May 1, 1898.
Sailing boldly with his six warships at night into the fortified harbor of Manila, he trained his guns the next morning on the ten-ship Spanish fleet, one of whose craft was only a moored hulk without functioning engines.
The entire collection of antiquated and overmatched vessels was quickly destroyed, with a loss of nearly four hundred Spaniards killed and wounded, and without the loss of a single life in Deweys fleet.
An American consul who was there wrote that all the American sailors needed was cough drops for throats made raw by cheers of victory.
Taciturn George Dewey became a national hero overnight.
He was promptly promoted to the rank of admiral, as the price of flags rose sharply.
An amateur poet blossomed forth with this: Yet Dewey was in a perilous position.
He had destroyed the enemy fleet, but he could not storm the forts of Manila with his sailors.
His nerves frayed, he was forced to wait in the steaming-hot bay while troop reinforcements were slowly assembled in America.
C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 Manila Corregidor Luzon Hong Kong (Br.
) PHILIPPINE ISLANDS CHINA Hainan FRENCH INDOCHINA FORMOSA (TAIWAN) (Japanese) Manila Mindanao BRITISH NORTH BORNEO SARAWAK (Br.
) NETHERLANDS EAST INDIES Bataan Deweys Route in the Philippines, 1898 Foreign warships meanwhile had begun to gather in the harbor, ostensibly to safeguard their nationals in Manila.
The Germans sent five vessels a naval force more powerful than Deweysand their haughty admiral defied the American blockade regulations.
After several disagreeable incidents, Dewey lost his temper and threatened the arrogant German with war as soon as you like.
Happily, the storm blew over.
The British commander, by contrast, was conspicuously successful in carrying out Londons new policy of friendliness.
A false tale subsequently circulated that the British dramatically interposed their ships to prevent the Germans from blowing the Americans out of the water.
Long-awaited American troops, finally arriving in force, captured Manila on August 13, 1898.
They collaborated with the Filipino insurgents, commanded by their well-educated, part-Chinese leader, Emilio Aguinaldo.
Dewey, to his later regret, had brought this shrewd and magnetic revolutionary from exile in Asia, so that he might weaken Spanish resistance.
These thrilling events in the Philippines had meanwhile focused attention on Hawaii.
An impression spread that America needed the archipelago as a coaling and provisioning way station, in order to send supplies and reinforcements to Dewey.
The truth is that the United States could have used these island Crossroads of the Pacific without annexing them, so eager was the white-dominated Honolulu government to compromise its neutrality and risk the vengeance of Spain.
But an appreciative American public would not leave Dewey in the lurch.
A joint resolution of annexation was rushed through Congress and approved by McKinley on July 7, 1898.
The residents of Hawaii were granted U.S.
citizenship with annexation and received full territorial status in 1900.
These events in the idyllic islands, though seemingly sudden, were but the culmination of nearly a century of Americanization by sailors, whalers, traders, and missionaries.
Shortly after the outbreak of war, the Spanish government ordered a fleet of warships to Cuba.
It was commanded by Admiral Cervera, who protested that his wretchedly prepared ships were flirting with suicide.
Four armored cruisers finally set forth (one without its main battery of guns).
They were accompanied by six torpedo boats, three of which had to be abandoned en route.
Panic seized the eastern seaboard of the United States.
American vacationers abandoned their seashore cottages, while nervous investors moved their securities to inland depositories.
Demands for protection poured in on Washington from nervous  citizens, and the Navy Department was forced to dispatch some useless old Civil War ships to useless places for morale purposes.
Cervera finally found refuge in bottle-shaped Santiago harbor, Cuba, where he was blockaded by the much more powerful American fleet.
Sound strategy seemed to dictate that an American army be sent in from the rear to drive out Cervera.
Leading the invading force was the grossly overweight General William R. Shafter, a leader so blubbery and gout-stricken that he had to be carried about on a door.
The ill-prepared Americans were unequipped for war in the tropics; they had been amply provided with heavy woolen underwear and uniforms designed for subzero operations against the Indians.
The Rough Riders, a part of the invading army, now charged onto the stage of history.
This colorful regiment of volunteers, short on discipline but long on dash, consisted largely of western cowboys and other hardy characters, with a sprinkling of expolo players and ex-convicts.
Commanded by Colonel Leonard Wood, the group was organized principally by the glory-hungry Theodore Roosevelt, who had resigned from the Navy Department to serve as lieutenant colonel.
Although totally without military experience, he used his strong political pull to secure his commission and to bypass physical standards.
He was so nearsighted that as a safeguard he took along a dozen pairs of spectacles, cached in handy spots on his person or nearby.
About the middle of June, a bewildered American army of seventeen thousand men finally embarked at congested Tampa, Florida, amid scenes of indescribable confusion.
The Rough  Riders, fearing that they would be robbed of glory, rushed one of the transports and courageously held C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 In my regiment nine-tenths of the men were better horsemen than I was, and probably two-thirds of them better shots than I was, while on the average they were certainly hardier and more enduring.
Yet after I had had them a very short while they all knew, and I knew too, that nobody else could command them as I could.
their place for almost a week in the broiling tropical sun.
About half of them finally got to Cuba without most of their horses, and the bowlegged regiment then came to be known as Woods Weary Walkers.
Shafters landing near Santiago, Cuba, was made without serious opposition.
Defending Spaniards, even more disorganized than the Americans, were unable to muster at this spot more than two thousand men.
Brisk fighting broke out on July 1 at El Caney and San Juan Hill, up which Colonel Roosevelt and his horseless Rough Riders charged, with strong support from two crack black regiments.
They suffered heavy casualties, but the colorful colonel, having the time of his life, shot a Spaniard with his revolver, and rejoiced to see his victim double up like a jackrabbit.
He later wrote a book on  his exploits, which the famed satirist, Mr.
Dooley remarked, ought to have been entitled  The American army, fast closing in on Santiago, spelled doom for the Spanish fleet.
Admiral Cervera, again protesting against suicide, was flatly ordered to fight for the honor of the flag.
The odds against him were heavy: the guns of the USS  threw more metal than his four armored cruisers combined.
After a running chase, on July 3 the  Spanish possessions DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PUERTO RICO Santiago JAMAICA (Br.
) American forces American victories Spanish forces U.S.
naval blockade CUBA Tampa Santiago Havana FLORIDA BAHAMAS (Br.
) UNITED  STATES HAITI The Cuban Campaign, 1898 foul-bottomed Spanish fleet was entirely destroyed, as the wooden decks caught fire and the blazing infernos were beached.
About five hundred Spaniards were killed, as compared with one death for the Americans.
Dont cheer, men, admonished Captain Philip of the  dying.
Shortly thereafter Santiago surrendered.
Hasty preparations were now made for a descent upon Puerto Rico before the war should end.
The American army, commanded by the famed Indianfighter General Nelson A. Miles, met little resistance, as most of the population greeted the invaders as  liberating heroes.
Dooley was led to refer to Ginral Miles Gran Picnic an Moonlight Excursion.
By this time Spain had satisfied its honor, and on August 12, 1898, it signed an armistice.
If the Spaniards had held out a few months longer in Cuba, the American army might have melted away.
The inroads of malaria, typhoid,  dysentery, and yellow fever became so severe  that hundreds were incapacitatedan army of  convalescents.
Others suffered from odorous canned meat known as embalmed beef.
Fiery and insubordinate Colonel Roosevelt, who had no regular military career to jeopardize, was a ringleader in making round-robin* demands on Washington that the army be moved before it perished.
About twenty-five thousand men, 80 percent of them ill, were transferred to chilly Long Island, where their light summer clothing finally arrived.
One of the wars worst scandals was the high death rate from sickness, especially typhoid fever.
This disease was rampant in the unsanitary training camps in the United States.
All told, nearly four hundred men lost their lives to bullets; over five thousand succumbed to bacteria and other causes.
Late in 1898 the Spanish and American negotiators met in Paris, there to begin heated discussions.
McKinley had sent five commissioners, including three senators, who would have a final vote on their own handiwork.
War-racked Cuba, as expected, was freed from its Spanish overlords.
The Americans had little difficulty in securing the remote Pacific island of Guam, which they had captured early in the conflict from astonished Spaniards who, lacking a cable, had not known that a war was on.
They also picked up Puerto Rico, the last remnant of what had  been Spains vast New World empire.
In the decades to come, American investment in the island and Puerto Rican immigration to the United States would make this acquisition one of the weightier consequences of this somewhat carefree war  (see Makers of America: The Puerto Ricans,  pp.
640641).
Knottiest of all was the problem of the Philippines, a veritable apple of discord.
These lush islands not only embraced an area larger than the British Isles but also contained a completely alien population of some 7 million souls.
McKinley was confronted with a devils dilemma.
He did not feel that America could honorably give the islands back to Spanish misrule, especially after it had fought a C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 *A round robin is a document signed in circular form around the edges so that no one person can be identified (and punished) as the first signer.
war to free Cuba.
And America would be turning its back upon its responsibilities in a cowardly fashion, he believed, if it simply pulled up anchor and sailed away.
McKinley viewed other alternatives open to him as trouble-fraught.
The Filipinos, if left to govern themselves, might fall into anarchy.
One of the major powers, possibly aggressive Germany, might then try to seize them, and the result might be a world war into which the United States would be sucked.
Seemingly the least of the evils consistent with national honor and safety was to acquire all the Philippines and then perhaps give the Filipinos their freedom later.
President McKinley, ever sensitive to public opinion, kept a carefully attuned ear to the ground.
The rumble that he heard seemed to call for the entire group of islands.
Zealous Protestant missionaries were eager for new converts from Spanish Catholicism,* and the invalid Mrs.
McKinley, to whom her husband was devoted, expressed deep concern about the welfare of the Filipinos.
Wall Street had generally opposed the war, but awakened by the booming of Deweys guns, it was clamoring for profits in the Philippines.
If this be commercialism, cried Mark Hanna, then for Gods sake let us have commercialism.
A tormented McKinley, so he was later reported as saying, finally went down on his knees seeking divine guidance.
An inner voice seemed to tell him to take all the Philippines and Christianize and civilize them.
This solution apparently coincided with the demands of the American people as well as with the McKinley-Hanna outlook.
The mixture of things spiritual and material in McKinleys reasoning was later slyly summarized by a historian: God directs usperhaps it will pay.
Profits thus joined hands with piety.
Fresh disputes broke out with the Spanish negotiators in Paris, once McKinley had reached the thorny decision to keep the Philippines.
Manila had been captured the day  signed, and the islands could not properly be listed among the spoils of war.
The deadlock was broken when the Americans at length agreed to pay Spain $20 million for the Philippine Islandsone of the best bargains the Spaniards ever drove and their last great haul from the New World.
House Speaker Czar Reed sneered at Americas having acquired millions of Malays, at three dollars a head, in the bush.
He resigned in protest against Americas new imperial adventure.
The signing of the pact of Paris touched off one of the most impassioned debates in American history.
Except for glacial Alaska, coral-reefed Hawaii, and a handful of Pacific atolls acquired mostly for whaling stations, the Republic had hitherto acquired only contiguous territory on the continent.
All previous acquisitions had been thinly peopled and capable of ultimate statehood.
But in the Philippines, the nation had on its hands a distant tropical area, thickly populated by Asians of alien race, culture, tongue, religion, and government institutions.
The Anti-Imperialist League sprang into being to fight the McKinley administrations expansionist moves.
The organization counted among its members some of the most prominent people in the *The Philippines had been substantially Christianized by Catholics before the founding of Jamestown in 1607.
When next I realized that the Philippines had dropped into our laps, I confess I did not know what to do with them.
I went down on my knees and prayed Almighty God for light and guidance.
And one night late it came to me this way.
That there was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them and by Gods grace do the very best we could by them, as our fellow men, for whom Christ also died.
And then I went to bed and went to sleep, and slept soundly.
United States, including the presidents of Stanford and Harvard Universities, the philosopher William James, and the novelist Mark Twain.
The antiimperialist blanket even stretched over such strange bedfellows as the labor leader Samuel Gompers and steel titan Andrew Carnegie.
Goddamn the United States for its vile conduct in the Philippine Isles!
burst out the usually mildmannered Professor James.
The Harvard philosopher could not believe that the United States could puke up its ancient soul in five minutes without a wink of squeamishness.
Anti-imperialists had still other arrows in their quiver.
The Filipinos panted for freedom, and to annex them would violate the consent of the governed philosophy in the Declaration of Independence.
Despotism abroad might well beget despotism at home.
Finally, annexation would propel the United States into the political and military cauldron of the Far East.
Yet the expansionists or imperialists could sing a seductive song.
They appealed to patriotism and to the glory of annexationdont let any dastard dishonor the flag by hauling it down.
Stressing the opportunities for exploiting the islands, they played up possible trade profits.
Manila, in fact, might become another Hong Kong.
The richer the natural resources of the islands appeared to be, the less capable of self-government the Filipinos seemed to be.
Rudyard Kipling, the British poet laureate of imperialism, urged America down the slippery path: C HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 In short, the wealthy Americans must help to uplift (and exploit) the underprivileged, underfed, and underclad of the world.
In the Senate the Spanish treaty ran into such heated opposition that it seemed doomed to defeat.
But at this juncture the silverite Bryan unexpectedly sallied forth as its champion.
As a Democratic volunteer colonel whom the Republicans had kept out of Cuba, he apparently had no reason to help the McKinley administration out of a hole.
But free silver was dead as a political issue.
Bryans foes assumed that he was preparing to fasten the stigma of imperialism on the Republicans and then sweep into the presidency in 1900 under the flaming banner of anti-imperialism.
Bryan could support the treaty on plausible grounds.
He argued that the war would not officially end until America had ratified the pact.
It already had the islands on its hands, and the sooner it accepted the document, the sooner it could give the Filipinos their independence.
After Bryan had used his personal influence with certain Democratic senators, the treaty was approved on February 6, 1899, with only one vote to spare.
But the responsibility, as Bryan had foreseen, rested primarily with the Republicans.
Many of Puerto Ricos 1 million inhabitants lived in poverty.
The islands population grew faster than its economy.
By the Foraker Act of 1900, Congress accorded the Puerto Ricans a limited degree of popular government and, in 1917, granted them U.S.
citizenship.
Although the American regime worked wonders in education, sanitation, transportation, and other tangible improvements, many of the inhabitants still aspired to independence.
Great numbers of Puerto Ricans ultimately moved to New York City, where they added to the diversity of its immigrant culture.
A thorny legal problem was posed by the questions, Did the Constitution follow the flag?
Did American laws, including tariff laws and the Bill of Rights, apply with full force to the newly acquired possessions?
Beginning in 1901 with the  effect, that the flag did outrun the Constitution, and that the outdistanced document did not necessarily extend with full force to the new windfalls.
The Filipinos and Puerto Ricans might be subject to American rule, but they did not enjoy all American rights.
Cuba, scorched and chaotic, presented another headache.
An American military government, set up under the administrative genius of General Leonard Wood of Rough Rider fame, wrought miracles in government, finance, education, agriculture, and public health.
Under his leadership a frontal attack was launched on yellow fever.
Spectacular experiments were performed by Dr.
Walter Reed and others upon American soldiers, who volunteered as human guinea pigs, and the stegomyia mosquito was proved to be the lethal carrier.
A cleanup of breeding places for mosquitoes wiped out yellow fever in Havana, while removing the recurrent fear of epidemics in cities of the South and Atlantic seaboard.
The United States, honoring its self-denying Teller Amendment of 1898, withdrew from Cuba in 1902.
Old World imperialists could scarcely believe their eyes.
But the Washington government could not turn this rich and strategic island completely loose on the international sea; a grasping power like Germany might secure dangerous lodgment near Americas soft underbelly.
The Cubans were therefore forced to write into their own constitution of 1901 the so-called Platt Amendment.
The hated restriction severely hobbled the Cubans.
They reluctantly bound themselves not to impair their independence by treaty or by contracting a debt beyond their resources.
They further agreed that the United States might intervene with troops to restore order and to provide mutual protection.
Finally, the Cubans promised to sell or lease needed coaling or naval stations, ultimately two and then only one (Guantanamo), to their powerful benefactor.
The United States still occupies its twenty-eight-thousand-acre beachhead under an agreement that can be revoked only by the consent of both parties.
In essence, the Spanish-American War was a kind of colossal coming-out party.
Despite a common misconception, the conflict did not cause the United States to become a world power.
Deweys thundering guns merely advertised the fact that the nation was already a world power.
t dawn on July 26, 1898, the U.S.
warship harbor, fired at the Spanish blockhouse, and landed some thirty-three hundred troops.
Within days the Americans had taken possession of the militarily strategic Caribbean island a thousand miles southeast of Florida.
In so doing they set in motion changes on the island that ultimately brought a new wave of immigrants to U.S.
shores.
Puerto Rico had been a Spanish possession since Christopher Columbus claimed it for Castile in 1493.
The Spaniards enslaved many of the islands forty thousand Taino Indians and set them to work on farms and in mines.
Many Tainos died of exhaustion and disease, and in 1511 the Indians rebelled.
The Spaniards crushed the uprising, killed thousands of Indians, and began importing African slavesthus establishing the basis for Puerto Ricos multiracial society.
The first Puerto Rican immigrants to the United States arrived as political exiles in the nineteenth century.
From their haven in America, they agitated for the islands independence from Spain.
In 1897 Spain finally granted the island local autonomy; ironically, however, the Spanish-American War the following year placed it in American hands.
Puerto Rican political migrs in the United States returned home, but they were soon replaced by poor islanders looking for work.
Changing conditions in Puerto Rico after the U.S.
takeover had driven these new immigrants north.
Although slow to grant Puerto Ricans U.S.
citizenship, the Americans quickly improved health and sanitation on the island, triggering a population surge in the early twentieth century.
At the same time, growing monopoly control of Puerto Ricos sugar cane plantations undermined the islands subsistence economy, and a series of hurricanes devastated the coffee plantations that had employed large numbers of people.
With almost no industry to provide wage labor, Puerto Ricos unemployment rate soared.
Thus when Congress finally granted Puerto Ricans U.S.
citizenship in 1917, thereby eliminating immigration hurdles, many islanders hurried north to find jobs.
Over the ensuing decades, Puerto Ricans went to work in Arizona cotton fields, New Jersey soup factories, and Utah mines.
The majority, however, clustered in New York City and found work in the citys cigar factories, shipyards, and garment industry.
Migration slowed somewhat after the 1920s as the Great Depression shrank the job market on the mainland and as World War II made travel hazardous.
When World War II ended in 1945, the sudden advent of cheap air travel sparked an immigration explosion.
As late as the 1930s, the tab for a boat trip to the mainland exceeded the average Puerto Ricans yearly earnings.
But with an airplane surplus after World War II, the six-hour flight from Puerto Rico to New York cost under fifty dollars.
The Puerto Rican population on the mainland quadrupled between 1940 and 1950 and tripled again by 1960.
In 1970, 1.5 million Puerto Ricans lived in the United States, one-third of the islands total population.
U.S.
citizenship and affordable air travel made it easy for Puerto Ricans to return home.
Thus to a far greater degree than most immigrant groups, Puerto Ricans kept one foot in the United States and the other on their native island.
By some estimates, 2 million people a year journeyed to and from the island during the postwar period.
Puerto Ricos gubernatorial candidates sometimes campaigned in New York for the thousands of voters who were expected to return to the island in time for the  election.
This transience worked to keep Puerto Ricans educational attainment and English proficiency far below the national average.
At the same time, the immigrants encountered a deep-seated racism in America unlike anything on their multiracial island.
Throughout the postwar years, Puerto Ricans remained one of the poorest groups in the United States, with a median family income below that of African-Americans and Mexican-Americans.
Still, Puerto Ricans have fared better economically in the United States than on the island, where, in 1970, 60 percent of all inhabitants lived below the poverty line.
In recent years Puerto Ricans have attained more schooling, and many have attended college.
Invigorated by the civil rights movement of the 1960s, Puerto Ricans also became more politically active, electing growing numbers of congressmen and state and city officials.
The war itself was short (113 days), spectacular, low in casualties, and uninterruptedly successful despite the bungling.
American prestige rose sharply, and the European powers grudgingly accorded the Republic more respect.
In Germany Prince Bismarck reportedly growled that there was a special Providence that looked after drunkards, fools, and the United States of America.
At times it seemed as though not only Providence but the Spaniards were fighting on the side of the Yankees.
So great, in fact, was Americas good fortune that rejoicing citizens found in the victories further supportmisleading supportfor their indifference to adequate preparedness.
An exhilarating new spirit thrilled America, buoyed along by the newly popular military marching-band music of John Philip Sousa.
National pride was touched and cockiness was increased by what John Hay called a splendid little war.
* Enthusiasm over these triumphs made easier the rush down the thorny path of empire.
America did not start the war with imperialistic motives, but after falling through the cellar door of imperialism in a drunken fit of idealism, it wound up with imperialistic and colonial fruits in its grasp.
The much-criticized British imperialists were pleased, partly because of the newfound friendship, partly because misery loves company.
But Americas German rival was envious, and Latin American neighbors were deeply suspicious of Yankee greed.
By taking on the Philippine Islands, the United States became a full-fledged Far Eastern power.
Hereafter these distant islands were to be a heel of Achillesa kind of indefensible hostage given to Japan, as events proved in 1941.
With singular shortsightedness, the Americans assumed dangerous commitments that they were later unwilling to defend by proper naval and military outlays.
But the lessons of unpreparedness were not altogether lost.
Captain Mahans big-navyism seemed vindicated, and pride in the exploits of the navy energized popular support for more and better battleships.
A masterly organizer, Elihu Root, took over the reins at the War Department.
He estabC HAPTER 27 The Path of Empire, 18901899 I have seen two Americas, the America before the Spanish American War and the America since.
*Anti-imperialist William James called it our squalid war with Spain.
lished a general staff and founded the War College in Washington.
His genius later paid dividends when the United States found itself involved in the world war of 19141918.
One of the happiest results of the conflict was the further closing of the bloody chasm between North and South.
Thousands of patriotic southerners had flocked to the Stars and Stripes, and the gray-bearded General Joseph (Fighting Joe) Wheelera Confederate cavalry hero of about a thousand Civil War skirmishes and battleswas given a command in Cuba.
He allegedly cried, in the heat of battle, To hell with the Yankees!
Dammit, I mean the Spaniards.
New England missionaries arrive in Hawaii Samoa crisis with Germany Pan-American Conference Mahan publishes  New Orleans crisis with Italy Valparaiso crisis with Chile Pribilof Islands dispute with Canada White planter revolt in Hawaii Cleveland refuses Hawaii annexation Cubans revolt against Spain Venezuelan boundary crisis with Britain Spanish-American War Teller Amendment Deweys victory at Manila Bay Hawaii annexed Senate ratifies treaty acquiring the Philippines Hawaii receives full territorial status Foraker Act for Puerto Rico Supreme Court  Platt Amendment U.S.
troops leave Cuba Puerto Ricans granted U.S.
citizenship For further reading, see page A19 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  S TRUGGLING FOR J USTICE AT H OME AND A BROAD  18991945 T he new century brought astonishing changes to the United States.
Victory in the Spanish-American War made it clear that the United States was now a world power.
Industrialization ushered in giant corporations, sprawling factories, sweatshop labor, and the ubiquitous automobile.
A huge wave of immigration was altering the face of the nation, especially the cities, where a majority of Americans lived by 1920.
With bigger cities came bigger fearsof crime, vice, poverty, and disease.
Changes of such magnitude raised vexing questions.
What role should the United States play in the world?
How could the enormous power of industry be controlled?
How would the millions of new immigrants make their way in America?
What should the country do about poverty, disease, and the continuing plague of racial inequality?
All these issues turned on a fundamental point: should government remain narrowly limited in its powers, or did the times require a more potent  government that would actively shape society and secure American interests abroad?
The progressive movement represented the first attempt to answer those questions.
Reform-minded men and women from all walks of life and from both major parties shared in the progressive crusade for greater government activism.
Buoyed by this outlook, Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard  Taft, and Woodrow Wilson enlarged the capacity of  government to fight graft, bust business trusts,  regulate corporations, and promote fair labor practices, child welfare, conservation, and consumer protection.
These progressive reformers, convinced that women would bring greater morality to politics, bolstered the decades-long struggle for female suffrage.
Women finally secured the vote in 1920 with the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment.
The progressive era presidents also challenged Americas tradition of isolationism in foreign policy.
They felt the country had a moral obligation to spread democracy and an economic opportunity to reap profits in foreign markets.
Roosevelt and Taft launched diplomatic initiatives in the Caribbean, Central America, and East Asia.
Wilson aspired to make the world safe for democracy by rallying support for American intervention in the First World War.
The progressive spirit waned, however, as the United States retreated during the 1920s into what President Harding called normalcy.
Isolationist sentiment revived with a vengeance.
Blessed with a booming economy, Americans turned their gaze inward to baseball heroes, radio, jazz, movies, and the first mass-produced American automobile, the Model T Ford.
Presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover backed off from the economic regulatory zeal of their predecessors.
Normalcy also had a brutal side.
Thousands of suspected radicals were jailed or deported in the Red Scare of 1919 and 1920.
Anti-immigrant passions flared until immigration quotas in 1924 squeezed the flow of newcomers to a trickle.
Race riots scorched several northern cities in the summer of 1919, a sign of how embittered race relations had become in the wake of the Great Migration of southern blacks to wartime jobs in northern industry.
A reborn Ku Klux Klan staged a comeback, not just in the South but in the North and West as well.
Normalcy itself soon proved short-lived, a casualty of the stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression that followed.
As Americans watched banks fail, and businesses  collapse, and millions of people lose their jobs,  they asked with renewed urgency what role the government should play in  rescuing the nation.
President Franklin D. Roosevelts answer was the New Deal an ambitious array of relief programs, public works, and economic regulations that failed to cure the Depression but furnished an impressive legacy of social reforms.
Most Americans came to accept an expanded federal governmental role at home under FDRs  leadership in the 1930s, but they still clung stubbornly to isolationism.
The United States did little in the 1930s to check the rising military aggression of Japan and Germany.
By the early 1940s, events forced Americans to reconsider.
Once Hitlers Germany had seized control of most of Europe, Roosevelt, who had long opposed the isolationists, found ways to aid a beleaguered Britain.
When Japan attacked the American naval base at Pearl Harbor in December 1941, isolationists at last fell silent.
Roosevelt led a stunned but determined nation into the Second World War, and victory in 1945 positioned the United States to assume a commanding position in the postwar world order.
The Great Depression and the Second World War brought to a head a half-century of debate over the role of government and the place of the United States in the world.
In the name of a struggle for  justice, Roosevelt established a new era of government activism at home and internationalism abroad.
The New Deals legacy set the terms of debate in American political life for the rest of the century.
America on the World Stage  18991909 T HEODORE R OOSEVELT , 1905 L iberty-loving Filipinos assumed that they, like the Cubans, would be granted their freedom after the Spanish-American War.
They were tragically deceived.
The Senate refused to pass such a resolution granting Filipino independence.
Bitterness toward the American troops mounted.
It finally erupted into open insurrection on February 4, 1899, under Emilio Aguinaldo.
The war with the Filipinos, unlike the splendid little set-to with Spain, was sordid and prolonged.
It involved more savage fighting, more soldiers killed, and far more scandal.
Anti-imperialists redoubled their protests.
In their view the United States, having plunged into war with Spain to free Cuba, was now fighting ten thousand miles away to rivet shackles on a people who asked for nothing but libertyin the American tradition.
As the ill-equipped Filipino armies were defeated, they melted into the jungle to wage vicious guerrilla warfare.
Many of the outgunned Filipinos used  barbarous methods, and the infuriated American troops responded in kind.
A brutal soldier song betrayed inner feelings: Atrocity tales shocked and rocked the United States, for such methods did not reflect Americas better self.
Uncle Sams soldiers resorted to such extremes as the painful water curethat is, forcing water down victims throats until they yielded information or died.
Reconcentration camps were even established that strongly suggested those of Butcher Weyler in Cuba.
America, having begun the Spanish war with noble ideals, now dirtied its hands.
One New York newspaper published a reply to Rudyard Kiplings famous poem: The backbone of the Filipino insurrection was finally broken in 1901, when American soldiers cleverly infiltrated a guerrilla camp and captured Aguinaldo.
But sporadic fighting dragged on for many dreary months.
The problem of a government for the conquered islanders worried President McKinley, who, in 1899, appointed the Philippine Commission to make appropriate recommendations.
In its second year, this body was headed by future president William H. Taft, an able and amiable lawyer-judge from Ohio who weighed about 350 pounds.
Forming a strong attachment to the Filipinos, he called them his little brown brothers and danced light-footedly with their tiny women.
But among the American soldiers, sweatily combing the jungles, a different view of the insurgent prevailed: McKinleys benevolent assimilation of the Philippines proceeded with painful slowness.
Millions of American dollars were poured into the islands to improve roads, sanitation, and public health.
Important economic ties, including trade  in sugar, developed between the two peoples.
American teacherspioneers of the blackboard set up an unusually good school system and helped United States Possessions to 1917 make English a second language.
But all this vast expenditure, which profited America little, was ill received.
The Filipinos, who hated compulsory Americanization, preferred liberty.
Like caged hawks, they beat against their gilded bars until they finally got their freedom, on the Fourth of July, 1946.
In the meantime, thousands of Filipinos emigrated to the United States (see Makers of America: The Filipinos, pp.
650651).
Exciting events had meanwhile been brewing in  faraway and enfeebled China.
Following its defeat by Japan in 18941895, the imperialistic European powers, notably Russia and Germany, moved in.
Like vultures descending upon a wounded whale, they began to tear away valuable leaseholds and economic spheres of influence from the Manchu government.
A growing group of Americans viewed the vivisection of China with alarm.
Churches worried about their missionary strongholds; manufacturers and exporters feared that Chinese markets would be monopolized by Europeans.
An alarmed American public, openly prodded by the press and slyly nudged by certain free-trade Britons, demanded that Washington do something.
Secretary of State John Hay, a quiet but witty poet-novelist-diplomat with a flair for capturing the popular imagination, finally decided upon a dramatic move.
In the summer of 1899, Hay dispatched to all the great powers a communication soon known as the Open Door note.
He urged them to announce that in their leaseholds or spheres of influence they would respect certain Chinese rights and the ideal of fair competition.
The phrase  fancy and gained wide acceptance.
Hays proposal caused much squirming in the leading capitals of the world.
It was like asking all those who did not have thieving designs to stand up and be counted.
Italy alone accepted the Open Door unconditionally; it was the only major power that had no leasehold or C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 Every Senator I see says, For Gods sake, dont let it appear we have any understanding with England.
How can I make bricks without straw?
That we should be compelled to refuse the assistance of the greatest power in the world [Britain], in carrying out our own policy, because all Irishmen are Democrats and some [American] Germans are foolsis enough to drive a man mad.
sphere of influence in China.
Britain, Germany, France, and Japan all accepted, but subject to the condition that the others acquiesce unconditionally.
Russia, with covetous designs on Chinas Manchuria, politely declined.
But John Hay artfully interpreted the Russian refusal as an acceptance and proclaimed that the Open Door was in effect.
Under such dubious midwifery was the infant born, and no one should have been surprised when the child proved to be sickly and relatively short-lived.
Open Door or not, patriotic Chinese did not care to be used as a doormat by the Europeans.
In 1900 a superpatriotic group known as the Boxers broke loose with the cry, Kill Foreign Devils.
Over two hundred missionaries and other ill-fated whites were murdered, and a number of foreign diplomats were besieged in the capital, Beijing (Peking).
A multinational rescue force of some eighteen thousand soldiers, including twenty-five hundred Americans, arrived in the nick of time and quelled the rebellion.
Such participation in a joint military operation, especially in Asia, was plainly contrary to the nations time-honored principles of nonentanglement and noninvolvement.
The victorious allied invaders acted angrily and vindictively.
They assessed prostrate China an excessive indemnity of $333 million, of which Americas share was to be $24.5 million.
When Washington discovered that this sum was much more than enough to pay damages and expenses, it remitted about $18 million.
The Beijing government, appreciating this gesture of goodwill, set aside the money  to educate a selected group of Chinese students in the United States.
These bright young scholars later played a significant role in the westernization of Asia.
Secretary Hay now let fly another paper broadside, for he feared that the triumphant powers might use the Boxer outrages as a pretext for carving up China outright.
His new circular note to the powers in 1900 announced that henceforth the Open Door would embrace the territorial integrity of China, in addition to its commercial integrity.
Defenseless China was spared partition during these troubled years.
But its salvation was probably due not to Hays fine phrases, but to the strength of the competing powers.
None of them could trust the others not to seek their own advantage.
t the beginning of the twentieth century, the United States, its imperial muscles just flexed in  the war with Spain, found itself in possession of the Philippines.
Uncertain of how to manage this empire, which seethed resentfully against its new masters, the United States promised to build democracy in the Philippines and to ready the islanders for home rule.
Almost immediately after annexation, the American governor of the archipelago sent a corps of Filipino students to the United States, hoping to forge future leaders steeped in American ways who would someday govern an independent Philippines.
Yet this small student group found little favor in their adopted country, although in their native land many went on to become respected citizens and leaders.
Most Filipino immigrants to the United States in these years, however, came not to study but to toil.
With Chinese immigration banned, Hawaii and the Pacific Coast states turned to the Philippines for cheap agricultural labor.
Beginning in 1906 the Hawaiian Sugar Planters Association aggressively recruited Filipino workers.
Enlistments grew slowly at first, but by the 1920s thousands of young Filipino men had reached the Hawaiian Islands and been assigned to sugar plantations or pineapple fields.
Typically a young Filipino wishing to emigrate first made his way to Manila, where he signed a contract with the growers that promised three years labor in return for transportation to Hawaii, wages, free housing and fuel, and return passage at the end of the contract.
Not all of the emigrants returned; there remain in Hawaii today some former field workers still theoretically eligible for free transport back to their native land.
Those Filipinos venturing as far as the American mainland found work less arduous but also less certain than did their countrymen on Hawaiian plantations.
Many mainlanders worked seasonallyin winter as domestic servants, busboys, or bellhops; in summer journeying to the fields to harvest lettuce, strawberries, sugar beets, and potatoes.
Eventually Filipinos, along with Mexican immigrants, shared the dubious honor of making up Californias agricultural work force.
A mobile society, Filipino-Americans also were overwhelmingly male; there was only one Filipino woman for every fourteen Filipino men in California in 1930.
Thus the issue of intermarriage became acutely sensitive.
California and many other states prohibited the marriage of Asians and Caucasians in demeaning laws that remained on the books until 1948.
And if a Filipino so much as approached a Caucasian woman, he could expect reprisals sometimes violent.
For example, white vigilante groups roamed the Yakima Valley in Washington and the San Joaquin and Salinas Valleys in California, intimidating and even attacking Filipinos whom they accused of improperly accosting white women.
In 1930 one Filipino was murdered and others wounded after they invited some Caucasian women to a dance.
Undeterred, the Filipinos challenged the restrictive state laws and the hooligans who found in them an excuse for mayhem.
But Filipinos, who did not become eligible for American citizenship until 1946, long lacked political leverage.
After World War II, Filipino immigration accelerated.
Between 1950 and 1970, the number of Filipinos in the United States nearly doubled, with women and men stepping aboard the new transpacific airliners in roughly equal numbers.
Many of these recent arrivals sprang from sturdy middleclass stock and sought in America a better life for their children than the Philippines seemed able to offer.
Today the war-torn and perpetually depressed archipelago sends more immigrants to American shores than does any other Asian nation.
President McKinleys renomination by the Republicans in 1900 was a foregone conclusion.
He had piloted the country through a victorious war; he had acquired rich, though burdensome, real estate; he had established the gold standard; and he had brought the promised prosperity of the full dinner pail.
Well stand pat!
was the poker-playing counsel of Mark Hanna, since 1897 a senator from Ohio.
McKinley was renominated at Philadelphia on a platform that smugly endorsed prosperity, the gold standard, and overseas expansion.
An irresistible vice-presidential boom had developed for Teddy Roosevelt (TR), the cowboyhero of San Juan Hill.
Capitalizing on his war-born popularity, he had been elected governor of New York, where the local political bosses had found him headstrong and difficult to manage.
They therefore devised a scheme to kick the colorful colonel upstairs into the vice presidency.
This plot to railroad Roosevelt worked beautifully.
Gesticulating wildly, he attended the nominating convention, where his western-style cowboy hat had made him stand out like a white crow.
He had no desire to die of slow rot in the vice-presidential burying ground, but he was eager to prove that he could get the nomination if he wanted it.
He finally gave in to a chanting chorus of We want Teddy!
He received a unanimous vote, except for his own.
A frantic Hanna reportedly moaned that there would be only one heartbeat between that wild-eyed madmanthat damned cowboyand the presidency of the United States.
William Jennings Bryan was the odds-on choice of the Democrats, meeting at Kansas City.
The freesilver issue was now as defunct as an abandoned mine, but Bryan, a slave to consistency, forced a silver plank down the throats of his protesting associates.
Choking on its candidates obstinacy, the Democratic platform proclaimed, as did Bryan, that the paramount issue was Republican overseas imperialism.
Campaign history partially repeated itself in 1900.
McKinley, the soul of dignity, sat safely on his front porch, as before.
Bryan, also as before, took to the stump in a cyclonic campaign, assailing both imperialism and Republican-fostered trusts.
The superenergetic, second-fiddle Roosevelt out-Bryaned Bryan.
He toured the country with revolver-shooting cowboys, and his popularity cut heavily into Bryans support in the Midwest.
Flashing his magnificent teeth and pounding his fist fiercely into his palm, Roosevelt denounced all dastards who would haul down Old Glory.
Bryanites loudly trumpeted their paramount issue of imperialism.
Lincoln, they charged, had abolished slavery for 3.5 million Africans; McKinley had reestablished it for 7 million Filipinos.
Republicans responded by charging that Bryanism, not imperialism, was the paramount issue.
By this accusation they meant that Bryan would rock the boat of prosperity once he got into office with his free-silver lunacy and other dangerous ideas.
The voters were much less concerned about imperialism than about Four Years More of the Full Dinner Pail.
When the smoke cleared, McKinley had triumphed by a much wider margin than in 1896: C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 7,218,491 to 6,356,734 popular votes, and 292 to 155 electoral votes.
But victory for the Republicans was not a mandate for or against imperialism.
Many citizens who favored Bryans anti-imperialism feared his free silver; many who favored McKinleys sound money hated his imperialism.
One citizen wrote to former president Cleveland: It is a choice between evils, and I am going to shut my eyes, hold my nose, vote, go home and disinfect myself.
If there was any mandate at all it was for the two  protection.
Content with good times, the country anticipated four more years of a full dinner pail crammed with fried chicken.
Boss Platt of New York gleefully looked forward to Inauguration Day, when he would see Roosevelt exit Albany and take the veil as vice president.
Kindly William McKinley had scarcely served another six months when, in September 1901, he was murdered by a deranged anarchist.
Roosevelt became president at age forty-two, the youngest thus far in American history.
Knowing he had a reputation for impulsiveness and radicalism, he sought to reassure the country by proclaiming that he would carry out the policies of his predecessor.
Cynics sneered that he would indeed carry them out to the garbage heap.
What manner of man was Theodore Roosevelt, the red-blooded blue blood?
Born into a wealthy and distinguished New York family, he had fiercely built up his spindly, asthmatic body by a stern and self-imposed routine of exercise.
Graduating from Harvard with Phi Beta Kappa honors, he published at the age of twenty-four the first of some thirty volumes of muscular prose.
Then came busy years, The Philippines are ours forever.
And just beyond the Philippines are Chinas illimitable markets.
We will not retreat from either.
We will not abandon our opportunity in the Orient.
We will renounce our part in the mission of our race: trustee, under God, of the civilization of the world.
You cannot maintain despotism in Asia and a republic in America.
If you try to deprive even a savage or a barbarian of his just rights you can never do it without becoming a savage or a barbarian yourself.
which involved duties as a ranch owner and bespectacled cowboy (Four Eyes) in the Dakotas, followed by various political posts.
When fully developed, he was a barrel-chested five feet ten inches, with prominent teeth, squinty eyes, droopy mustache, and piercing voice.
The Rough Riders high-voltage energy was electrifying.
Believing that it was better to wear out than to rust out, he would shake the hands of some six thousand people at one stretch or ride horseback many miles in a day as an example for portly cavalry officers.
Not surprisingly, he gathered about him a group of athletic, tennis-playing cronies, who were popularly dubbed the tennis cabinet.
Incurably boyish and bellicose, Roosevelt loved to fightan elegant row.
He never ceased to preach the virile virtues and to denounce civilized softness, with its pacifists and other flubdubs and mollycoddles.
An ardent champion of military and naval preparedness, he adopted as his pet proverb, Speak softly and carry a big stick, [and] you will go far.
If statesmen had the big stick, they could work their will among foreign nations without shouting; if they lacked it, shouting would do no good.
TR had both a big stick and a shrill voice.
Wherever Roosevelt went, there was a great stir.
At a wedding he eclipsed the bride, at a funeral the corpse.
Shockingly unconventional, he loved to break hoary precedentsthe hoarier the better.
He was a colossal egoist, and his self-confidence merged with self-righteousness.
So sure was he of the correctness of his convictions that he impetuously branded people liars who disagreed with him.
As a true cosmopolite, he loved people and mingled with those of all ranks, from Catholic cardinals to professional prizefighters, one of whom blinded a Rooseveltian eye in a White House bout.
An outspoken moralizer and reformer, Roosevelt preached virtue from the White House pulpit.
Yet he was an opportunist who would cut a deal rather than butt his head against a stone wall.
He was, in reality, much less radical than his blustery actions would indicate.
A middle-of-the-roader, he stood just a little left of center and bared his mulelike molars at liberals and reactionaries alike.
Roosevelt rapidly developed into a master politician with an idolatrous personal following.
After visiting him, a journalist wrote, You go home and wring the personality out of your clothes.
TR as he was calledhad an enormous popular appeal, partly because the common people saw in him a fiery champion.
A magnificent showman, he was always front-page copy; his cowboyism, his bear shooting, his outsize teeth, and his pince-nez glasses were ever the delight of cartoonists.
Though a staunch party man, he detested many of the dirtyhanded bosses.
But he learned, as Cleveland never did, to hold his nose and work with them.
Above all, Roosevelt was a direct-actionist.
He believed that the president should lead, and although he made mistakes, he kept things noisily movinggenerally forward.
Never a lawyer, he condemned the law and the courts as too slow.
He had no real respect for the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government.
Finding the Constitution too rigid, he would on occasion ignore it; finding Congress too rebellious, he tried a mixture of coercion and compromise on it.
The president, he felt, may take any action in the general C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 interest that is not specifically forbidden by the laws of the Constitution.
As one poet noted, Foreign affairs absorbed much of Roosevelts bullish energy.
Having traveled extensively in Europe, he enjoyed a far more intimate knowledge of the outside world than most of his predecessors.
The Spanish-American War had emphasized the need for the long-talked-about canal across the Central American isthmus, through which only printers ink had ever flowed.
Americans had learned a sobering lesson when the battleship  of war in 1898, had to steam all the way around South America to join the fleet in Cuban waters.
An isthmian canal would plainly augment the strength of the navy by increasing its mobility.
Such a waterway would also make easier the defense of such recent acquisitions as Puerto Rico, Hawaii, and the Philippines, while facilitating the operations of the American merchant marine.
Initial obstacles in the path of the canal builders were legal rather than geographical.
By the terms of the ancient Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, concluded with Britain in 1850, the United States could not secure exclusive control over such a route.
But by 1901 Americas British cousins were willing to yield ground.
Confronted with an unfriendly Europe and bogged down in the South African Boer War, they consented to the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty in 1901.
It not only gave the United States a free hand to build the canal but conceded the right to fortify it as well.
Legal barriers now removed, the next question was, Where should the canal be dug?
Many American experts favored the Nicaraguan route, but agents of the old French Canal Company were eager to salvage something from their costly failure at  S -shaped Panama.
Represented by a young, energetic, and unscrupulous engineer, Philippe BunauVarilla, the New Panama Canal Company suddenly dropped the price of its holdings from $109 million to the fire-sale price of $40 million.
After much debate, Congress in June 1902 decided on the Panama route.
The scene now shifted to Colombia, of which Panama was an unwilling part.
A treaty highly favorable to the United States was negotiated between Washington and a Colombian government agent in Bogota.
It granted to the United States a lease for a six-milewide zone in perpetuity in exchange for $10 million and an annual payment of $250,000.
The Colombian senate rejected the treaty, putting a higher value on this precious isthmian strip.
Evidence later unearthed indicates that had Washington been willing to pay an additional $15 million, the pact would have been approved.
Roosevelt was infuriated by his setback at the hands of what he called those dagoes.
Frantically eager to be elected president in his own right in 1904, he was anxious to make the dirt fly to impress the voters.
Damn the law, he reportedly cried in private, I want the canal built!
He assailed the blackmailers of Bogota who, like armed highwaymen, were blocking the onward march of civilization.
He failed to note that the U.S.
Senate also rejects treaties.
Impatient Panamanians, who had rebelled numerous times, were ripe for another revolt.
They had counted on a wave of prosperity to follow construction of the canal, and they feared that the United States would now turn to the Nicaraguan route.
Scheming Bunau-Varilla was no less disturbed by the prospect of losing the companys $40 million.
Working hand in glove with the Panama revolutionists, he raised a tiny patriot army consisting largely of members of the Panamanian fire department, plus five hundred bought Colombian troopsfor a reported price of $100,000.
The Panama revolution occurred on November 3, 1903, with the incidental killing of a Chinese civilian and a donkey.
Colombian troops were gathered to crush the uprising, but U.S.
naval forces would not let them cross the isthmus.
Roosevelt justified this highly questionable interference by a strained interpretation of the treaty of 1846 with Colombia.
(This pact obligated Washington to maintain  the perfect neutrality of the isthmus, obviously against outsiders.
) Roosevelt moved rapidly to make steamy Panama a virtual outpost of the United States.
Three days after the uprising, he hastily extended the right hand of recognition.
Fifteen days later, BunauVarilla, who was now the Panamanian minister despite his French citizenship, signed the Hay Bunau-Varilla treaty in Washington.
The price of the canal strip was left the same, but the zone was widened from six to ten miles.
The French company gladly pocketed its $40 million from the U.S.
Treasury.
Roosevelt, it seems clear, did not actively plot to tear Panama from the side of Colombia.
But the conspirators knew of his angrily expressed views, and they counted on his using the big stick to hold Colombia at bay.
Yet the Rough Rider became so indiscreetly involved in the Panama affair as to  create the impression that he had been a secret party to the intrigue.
Unhappily, the United States suffered a black eye as a result of Roosevelts cowboy diplomacy.
European imperialists, who were old hands at this sort of thing, could now raise their eyebrows in scorn at Americas superior moral pretensionsand they did.
C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 Big Stick in the Caribbean In 1901 Roosevelt declared, If a man continually blusters .
a big stick will not save him from trouble; and neither will speaking softly avail, if back of the softness there does not lie strength, power.
If the boaster is not prepared to back up his words, his position becomes absolutely contemptible.
(United States base, 1903) Guantanamo Panama City Colon Bogota MEXICO 10-MILE U.S.
ZONE NICARAGUA PANAMA COLOMBIA VENEZUELA (U.S.
Protectorate) HAITI DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PUERTO RICO (U.S.
) CUBA Panama Canal Proposed canal The so-called rape of Panama marked an ugly downward lurch in U.S.
relations with Latin America.
Much fear had already been aroused by the recent seizure of Puerto Rico and by the Yankee stranglehold on Cuba.
The fate of Colombia, when it dared defy the Colossus of the North, indicated that its weak fellow republics were not safe.
The era of the bullying Big Brother policy was brazenly launched.
Roosevelt heatedly defended himself against all charges of evildoing.
He claimed that he had received a mandate from civilization to start the canal and that Colombia had wronged the United States by not permitting itself to be benefited.
To deal with these blackmailers, he insisted, was like nailing currant jelly to the wall.
But TR was not completely candid.
He failed to point out that the Nicaragua route was about equally feasible and that it was available without a revolution.
Yet this alternative would have involved some delay, and the presidential election of 1904 was fast approaching.
Active work was begun on making the dirt fly in 1904, but grave difficulties were encountered, ranging from labor troubles to landslides.
The organization was finally perfected under an energetic but autocratic West Point engineer, Colonel George Washington Goethals.
At the outset sanitation proved to be more important than excavation.
Colonel William C. Gorgas, the quiet and determined exterminator of yellow fever in Havana, ultimately made the Canal Zone as safe as a health resort.
Americans finally succeeded where the French had failed.
In 1914 the colossal canal project was completed at an initial cost of about $400 million, just as World War I was breaking out.
The whole enterprise, in the words of the English writer James Bryce, was the greatest liberty Man has ever taken with Nature.
Latin American debt defaults created the conditions for further Rooseveltian involvement in affairs south of the border.
Nations such as Venezuela and the Dominican Republic were chronically in arrears in their payments to European creditors, particularly Britain and Germany.
Seeking to force payment, German warships sank two Venezuelan gunboats and bombarded a town in early 1903.
This ironfisted intervention aroused Roosevelt.
He feared that if the Germans or British got their foot in the door as bill collectors, they might remain in Latin America, in flagrant violation of the Monroe Doctrine.
Roosevelt therefore devised a devious policy of preventive intervention, better known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine.
He declared that in the event of future financial malfeasance by the Latin American nations, the United States itself would intervene, take over the customshouses, pay off the debts, and keep the troublesome powers on the other side of the Atlantic.
In short, no outsiders could push around the Latin nations except Uncle Sam, Policeman of the Caribbean.
This new brandishing of the big stick in the Caribbean became effective in 1905, when the United States took over the management of tariff collections in the Dominican Republic, an arrangement formalized in a treaty with the Dominicans two years later.
Dominican officials, who had raked in much juicy graft, were not happy with such interference, and they acquiesced only after some strenuous arm-twisting from Washington.
But from a debt-collecting point of view, the customshouse intervention was a success.
Roosevelts corollary, though tacked onto the Monroe Doctrine, bore only a strained relation to the original dictum of 1823.
Monroe had in effect I have been hoping and praying for three months that the Santo Domingans would behave so that I would not have to act in  any way.
I want to do nothing but what a policeman has to do.
As for annexing  the island, I have about the same desire  to annex it as a gorged boa-constrictor  might have to swallow a porcupine  wrong-end-to.
said to the European powers, Thou shalt not intervene.
TR changed this warning to mean, We shall intervene to prevent you from intervening.
The Roosevelt doctrine was actually so radical as to be a completely new policy, but it gained readier acceptance by being associated with the honored name of Monroe.
Yet in its own right, the corollary had considerable merit as a preemptive stroke.
Roosevelts rewriting of Monroes doctrine had its dark side.
It probably did more than any other single step to promote the Bad Neighbor policy begun in these years.
As time wore on, the new corollary was used to justify wholesale interventions and repeated landings of the marines, all of which helped turn the Caribbean into a Yankee lake.
Latin Americans mistakenly cursed the unoffending Monroe, when they should have cursed the offending Roosevelt.
To them it seemed as though the Monroe Doctrine, far from providing a shield, was a cloak behind which the United States sought to strangle them.
The shadow of the big stick likewise fell on Cuba in 1906.
Revolutionary disorders brought an appeal from the Cuban president, and necessity being the mother of invention, U.S.
Marines were landed.
These police forces were withdrawn temporarily in 1909, but in Latin American eyes the episode was but another example of the creeping power of the Colossus of the North.
Booted and spurred, Roosevelt charged into international affairs far beyond Latin America.
The outbreak of war between Russia and Japan in 1904 gave him a chance to perform as a global statesman.
The Russian bear, having lumbered across Asia, was seeking to bathe its frostbitten paws in the ice-free ports of Chinas Manchuria, particularly Port Arthur.
In Japanese eyes, Manchuria and Korea in tsarist hands were pistols pointed at Japans strategic heart.
Russian troops had invaded Manchuria during the Boxer outburst of 1900 and, despite solemn promises, were not withdrawing.
The tsar was obviously stalling until his trans-Siberian railroad could be finished, as it would be in a few months.
With the clock ticking against them, the Japanese suddenly began war in 1904 with a devastating surprise pounce on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur.
They proceeded to administer a humiliating series of beatings to the inept Russiansthe first serious military setback to a European power by a non-European force since the Turkish invasions of C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 the sixteenth century.
But as the war dragged on, Japan began to run short of men and yena weakness it did not want to betray to the enemy.
Tokyo officials therefore approached Roosevelt in the deepest secrecy and asked him to help sponsor peace  negotiations.
Roosevelt agreed and shepherded the delegates of the two sides together at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in 1905.
The Japanese presented stern demands for a huge indemnity and the entire strategic island of Sakhalin, while the Russians stubbornly refused to admit the depths of their defeat.
Blustering at both sides behind the scenes, Roosevelt forced through an accord in which the Japanese received no indemnity for the losses and only the southern half of Sakhalin.
For achieving this agreement, as well as for helping arrange an international conference at Algeciras, Spain, in 1906 to mediate North African disputes, Roosevelt received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906.
But the price of TRs diplomatic glory was high for U.S.
foreign relations.
Two historic friendships withered on the windswept plains of Manchuria.
American relations with Russia, once friendly, soured as the Russians implausibly accused Roosevelt of robbing them of military victory.
Revelations about savage massacres of Russian Jews further poisoned American feeling against Russia.
Japan, once Americas protg, felt robbed of its due compensation.
Both newly powerful, Japan and America now became rivals in Asia, as fear and jealousy between them grew.
To many Americans, the Japanese were getting too big for their kimonos.
Adding to tensions between America and Japan was the issue of Japanese migration to Americas Pacific Coast.
The Japanese government prohibited emigration of its citizens until 1884, when it began allowing temporary laborers to work on sugar plantations in Hawaii.
From there thousands of Japanese were recruited for work in California as farm laborers, railroad workers, and servants.
Like the Chinese before them, Japanese immigrants did the nations most arduous, dangerous work but were barred from becoming citizens.
And like the Chinese,  Japanese immigrants confronted racist hostility.
Although Japanese residents never amounted to more than 3 percent of the states population, white Californians ranted about a new yellow peril and feared being drowned in an Asian sea.
A showdown on the influx came in 1906 when San Franciscos school board, coping with the aftermath of a frightful earthquake and fire, ordered the segregation of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean students in a special school to free more space for whites.
Instantly the incident boiled into an international crisis.
The people of Japan, who were highly sensitive on questions of race, regarded this discrimination as an insult to them and their beloved children.
On both sides of the Pacific, irresponsible war talk sizzled in the yellow pressthe real yellow peril.
Roosevelt, who as a Rough Rider had relished shooting, was less happy over the prospect that California might stir up a war that all the other states would have to wage.
He therefore invited the entire San Francisco Board of Education, headed by a bassoon-playing mayor under indictment for graft, to come to the White House.
C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 TR finally broke the deadlock, but not until he had brandished his big stick and bared his big teeth.
The Californians were induced to repeal the offensive school order and to accept what came to be known as the Gentlemens Agreement.
This secret understanding was worked out, during 19071908, by an exchange of diplomatic notes between Washington and Tokyo.
The Japanese, for their part, agreed to stop the flow of laborers to the American mainland by withholding passports.
Roosevelt worried that his intercession between California and Japan might be interpreted in Tokyo as prompted by fear of the Japanese.
Accordingly, he hit upon a dramatic scheme to impress the Japanese with the heft of his big stick.
He daringly decided to send the entire battleship fleet on a highly visible voyage around the world.
Late in 1907 sixteen sparkling-white, smokebelching battleships started from Virginia waters.
Their commander pointedly declared that he was ready for a feast, a frolic, or a fight.
The Great White Fleetsaluted by cannonading champagne corksreceived tumultuous welcomes in Latin America, Hawaii, New Zealand, and Australia.
As events turned out, an overwhelming reception in Japan was the high point of the trip.
Tens of thousands of kimonoed schoolchildren had been trained to wave tiny American flags and sing The Star-Spangled Bannerreportedly in English.
In the warm diplomatic atmosphere created by the visit of the fleet, the Root-Takahira agreement of 1908 was reached with Japan.
The United States and Japan solemnly pledged themselves to respect each others territorial possessions in the Pacific and to uphold the Open Door in China.
The once fight-thirsty Roosevelt, who thus went out of his way to avoid a war with Japan, regarded the battleship cruise as his most important contribution to peace.
The voyage of the white fleet also gave Uncle Sam a new recruiting slogan: Join the Navy and See the World.
C HAPTER 28 America on the World Stage, 18991909 Aguinaldo launches rebellion against  United States in the Philippine Islands First American Open Door note Boxer Rebellion and U.S.
expedition to  China Second Open Door note McKinley defeats Bryan for presidency McKinley assassinated; Roosevelt assumes  presidency Filipino rebellion defeated Hay-Pauncefote Treaty Colombian senate rejects canal treaty Panamanian revolution against Colombia HayBunau-Varilla treaty Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe  Doctrine Construction of the Panama Canal United States takes over Dominican  Republic customs Roosevelt mediates Russo-Japanese peace  treaty San Francisco Japanese education crisis Roosevelt arranges Algeciras conference U.S.
Marines occupy Cuba Great White Fleet Gentlemens Agreement with Japan Root-Takahira agreement merican imperialism has long been an embarrassing topic for students of American history, who remember the Republics own revolutionary origins and anti-colonial tradition.
Perhaps for that reason, many historians have tried to explain the dramatic overseas expansionism of the 1890s as some kind of aberrationa sudden, singular, and short-lived departure from time-honored American principles and practices.
Various explanations have been offered to account for this spasmodic lapse.
Scholars such as Julius Pratt pointed to the irresponsible behavior of the yellow press.
Richard Hofstadter ascribed Americas imperial fling to the psychic crisis of the 1890s, a crisis brought on, he argued, by the strains of the decades economic depression and the Populist upheaval.
Howard K. Beale emphasized the contagious scramble for imperial possessions by the European powers, as well as Japan, in these years.
In Beales argument, the United Statesand Theodore Roosevelt in particularsuccumbed to a kind of international peer pressure: if other countries were expanding their international roles and even establishing colonies around the globe, could the United States safely refrain from doing the same?
In Beales view, Theodore Roosevelt was no simple-minded imperial swashbuckler, but a coolly calculating diplomatic realist who perceived that if the United States did not hold its own against other powers, it would soon risk being pushed around, even in its own hemisphere, despite the Monroe Doctrine.
Perhaps the most controversial interpretation of American imperialism has come from a so-called New Left school of writers, inspired by William Appleman Williams (and before him by V. I. Lenins 1916 book  argue that the explanation for political and military expansion abroad is to be found in economic expansion at home.
Increasing industrial output, so the argument goes, required ever more raw materials and, especially, overseas markets.
To meet those needs, the nation adopted a strategy of informal empire, shunning formal territorial possessions (with the conspicuous exception of the Philippines), but seeking economic dominance over foreign markets, materials, and investment outlets.
That revisionist interpretation, in turn, has been sharply criticized by scholars who point out that foreign trade accounted for only a tiny share of American output and that the diplomacy of this period was far too complex to be reduced to  economic need.
Most recently, historians have highlighted the importance of race and gender in the march toward empire.
Roosevelt and other imperialists perceived their world in gendered terms.
American society, many feared, was losing touch with the manly virtues.
It had grown soft and feminine since the closing of the frontier.
Imperialists also saw the nations of the world in a strict racial hierarchy, with primitive blacks and Indians at the bottom and civilized Anglo-Saxons at the top.
In this worldview the conquest of inferior peoples seemed naturala tropical tonic to restore the nations masculine virility.
Scholars who emphasize these explanations of imperialism are less likely to see the expansionism of the 1890s as an aberration in American history.
Instead, they argue, these overseas adventures were part of a long tradition of racefueled militarism, from the nations earliest Indian wars to Cold War engagements in Korea and Vietnam.
For further reading, see page A20 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt  19011912 T HEODORE R OOSEVELT , 1905 N early 76 million Americans greeted the new century in 1900.
Of them, almost one in seven was foreign-born.
In the fourteen years of peace that remained before the Great War of 1914 engulfed the globe, 13 million more migrants would carry their bundles down the gangplanks to the land of promise.
Hardly had the twentieth century dawned on the ethnically and racially mixed American people than they were convulsed by a reform movement, the like of which the nation had not seen since the 1840s.
The new crusaders, who called themselves progressives, waged war on many evils, notably monopoly, corruption, inefficiency, and social injustice.
The progressive army was large, diverse, and widely deployed, but it had a single battle cry: Strengthen the State.
The real heart of the movement, explained one of the progressive reformers, was to use government as an agency of human  welfare.
The groundswell of the new reformist wave went far backto the Greenback Labor party of the 1870s and the Populists of the 1890s, to the mounting unrest throughout the land as grasping industrialists concentrated more and more power in fewer and fewer hands.
An outworn philosophy of handsoff individualism seemed increasingly out of place in the modern machine age.
Social and economic problems were now too complex for the intentionally feeble Jeffersonian organs of government.
Progressive theorists were insisting that society could no longer afford the luxury of a limitless let-alone (laissez-faire) policy.
The people, through government, must substitute mastery for drift.
Well before 1900, perceptive politicians and writers had begun to pinpoint targets for the progressive attack.
Bryan, Altgeld, and the Populists loudly branded the bloated trusts with the stigma of corruption and wrongdoing.
In 1894 Henry Demarest Lloyd charged headlong into the Standard Oil Company with his book  new rich with his prickly pen in  wealth and conspicuous consumption.
Other pen-wielding knights likewise entered the fray.
The keen-eyed and keen-nosed Danish immigrant Jacob A. Riis, a reporter for the  shocked middle-class Americans in 1890 with  indictment of the dirt, disease, vice, and misery of the rat-gnawed human rookeries known as New York slums.
The book deeply influenced a future New York City police commissioner, Theodore Roosevelt.
Novelist Theodore Dreiser used his blunt prose to batter promoters and profiteers in  Caustic critics of social injustice issued from several other corners.
Socialists, many of whom were European immigrants inspired by the strong movement for state socialism in the Old World, began to register appreciable strength at the ballot box.
High-minded messengers of the social gospel promoted a brand of progressivism based in Christian teachings.
They used religious doctrine to demand better housing and living conditions for the urban poor.
Feminists in multiplying numbers added social justice to suffrage on their list of needed reforms.
With urban pioneers like Jane Addams in Chicago and Lillian Wald in New York blazing the way, women entered the fight to improve the lot of families living and working in the festering cities.
Beginning about 1902 the exposing of evil became a flourishing industry among American publishers.
A group of aggressive tenand fifteen-cent popular magazines surged to the front, notably  fierce circulation wars, they dug deep for the dirt that the public loved to hate.
Enterprising editors financed extensive research and encouraged pugnacious writing by their bright young reporters, whom President Roosevelt branded as muckrakers in 1906.
Annoyed by their excess of zeal, he compared the mudslinging magazine dirt-diggers to the figure in Bunyans  raking manure that he could not see the celestial crown dangling overhead.
Despite presidential scolding, these muckrakers boomed circulation, and some of their most scandalous exposures were published as best-selling books.
The reformer-writers ranged far, wide, and deep in their crusade to lay bare the muck of iniquity in American society.
In 1902 a brilliant New York reporter, Lincoln Steffens, launched a series of articles in  fearlessly unmasked the corrupt alliance between big business and municipal government.
Steffens was followed in the same magazine by Ida M. Tarbell, a pioneering journalist who published a devastating but factual expos of the Standard Oil Company.
(Her father had been ruined by the oil interests.
) Fearing legal reprisals, the muckraking magazines went to great pains and expense to check their materialpaying as much as three thousand dollars to verify a single Tarbell article.
Plucky muckrakers fearlessly tilted their penlances at varied targets.
They assailed the malpractices of life insurance companies and tariff lobbies.
They roasted the beef trust, the money trust, the railroad barons, and the corrupt amassing of American fortunes.
Thomas W. Lawson, an erratic speculator who had himself made $50 million on the stock market, laid bare the practices of his accomplices in Frenzied Finance.
This series of articles, appearing in 19051906, rocketed the circulation of many enemies among his rich associates, and he died a poor man.
David G. Phillips shocked an already startled nation by his series in  Treason of the Senate (1906).
He boldly charged that seventy-five of the ninety senators did not represent the people at all but the railroads and trusts.
This withering indictment, buttressed by facts, impressed President Roosevelt.
Phillips continued his attacks through novels and was fatally shot in 1911 by a deranged young man whose family he had allegedly maligned.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 Some of the most effective fire of the muckrakers was directed at social evils.
The ugly list included the immoral white slave traffic in women, the rickety slums, and the appalling number of industrial accidents.
The sorry subjugation of Americas 9 million blacksof whom 90 percent still lived in the South and one-third were illiteratewas spotlighted in Ray Stannard Bakers  luridly to light by John Spargos  Vendors of potent patent medicines (often heavily spiked with alcohol) likewise came in for bitter criticism.
These conscienceless vultures sold incredible quantities of adulterated or habitforming drugs, while doping the press with lavish advertising.
Muckraking attacks in  ably reinforced by Dr.
Harvey W. Wiley, chief chemist of the Department of Agriculture, who with his famous Poison Squad performed experiments on himself.
Full of sound and fury, the muckrakers signified much about the nature of the progressive reform movement.
They were long on lamentation and short on sweeping remedies.
To right social wrongs, they counted on publicity and an aroused public conscience, not drastic political change.
They sought not to overthrow capitalism but to cleanse it.
The cure for the ills of American democracy, they earnestly believed, was more democracy.
Progressive reformers were mainly middle-class men and women who felt themselves squeezed from above and below.
They sensed pressure from the new giant corporations, the restless immigrant hordes, and the aggressive labor unions.
The progressives simultaneously sought two goals: to use state power to curb the trusts and to stem the socialist threat by generally improving the common  persons conditions of life and labor.
Progressives emerged in both major parties, in all regions, and at all levels of government.
The truth is that progressivism was less a minority movement and more a majority mood.
One of the first objectives of progressives was to regain the power that had slipped from the hands  of the people into those of the interests.
These ardent reformers pushed for direct primary elections so as to undercut power-hungry party bosses.
They favored the initiative so that voters could directly propose legislation themselves, thus bypassing the boss-bought state legislatures.
Progressives also agitated for the referendum.
This device would place laws on the ballot for final approval by the people, especially laws that had been railroaded through a compliant legislature by free-spending agents of big business.
The recall would enable the voters to remove faithless elected officials, particularly those who had been bribed by bosses or lobbyists.
Now, it is very necessary that we should not flinch from seeing what is vile and debasing.
There is filth on the floor and it must be scraped up with the muck-rake; and there are times and places where this service is the most needed of all the services that can be performed.
But the man who never does anything else, who never thinks or speaks or writes, save of his feats with the muck-rake, speedily becomes, not a help to society, not an incitement to good, but one of the most potent forces for evil.
Cities  Bribery is no ordinary felony, but treason; .
corruption which breaks out here and there and now and then is not an occasional offense, but a common practice, and .
the effect of it is literally to change the  form of our government from one that is representative of the people to an oligarchy, representative of special interests.
Rooting out graft also became a prime goal of earnest progressives.
A number of the state legislatures passed corrupt-practices acts, which limited the amount of money that candidates could spend for their election.
Such legislation also restricted huge gifts from corporations, for which the donors would expect special favors.
The secret Australian ballot was likewise being introduced more widely in the states to counteract boss rule.
Bribery was less feasible when bribers could not tell if they were getting their moneys worth from the bribed.
Direct election of U.S.
senators became a favorite goal of progressives, especially after the muckrakers had exposed the scandalous intimacy between greedy corporations and Congress.
By  1900 the Senate had so many rich men that it was often sneered at as the Millionaires Club.
Too many of these prosperous solons, elected as they then were by trust-dominated legislatures, heeded the voice of their masters rather than the voice of the masses.
A constitutional amendment to bring about the popular election of senators had rough sledding in Congress, for the plutocratic members of the Senate were happy with existing methods.
But a number of states established primary elections in which the voters expressed their preferences for the Senate.
The local legislatures, when choosing senators, found it politically wise to heed the voice of the people.
Partly as a result of such pressures, the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution, approved in 1913, established the direct election of U.S.
senators.
(See the Appendix.
) But the expected improvement in caliber was slow in coming.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 We intend simply to be ourselves, not just our little female selves, but our whole big human selves.
Woman suffrage, the goal of feminists for many decades, likewise received powerful new support from the progressives early in the 1900s.
The political reformers believed that womens votes would elevate the political tone, and the foes of the saloon felt that they could count on the support of enfranchised females.
The suffragists, with their cry of Votes for Women and Equal Suffrage for Men  and Women, protested bitterly against Taxation Without Representation.
Many of the states, especially the more liberal ones in the West, gradually extended the vote to women.
But by 1910 nationwide female suffrage was still a decade away, and a suffragist could still be sneeringly defined as one who has ceased to be a lady and has not yet become a gentleman.
Progressives scored some of their most impressive gains in the cities.
Frustrated by the inefficiency and corruption of machine-oiled city government, many localities followed the pioneering example of Galveston, Texas.
In 1901 it had appointed expertstaffed commissions to manage urban affairs.
Other communities adopted the city-manager system, also designed to take politics out of municipal administration.
Some of these reforms obviously valued efficiency more highly than democracy, as control of civic affairs was further removed from the peoples hands.
Urban reformers likewise attacked slumlords, juvenile delinquency, and wide-open prostitution (vice-at-a-price), which flourished in red-light districts unchallenged by bribed police.
Public-spirited city dwellers also moved to halt the corrupt sale of franchises for streetcars and other public utilities.
Progressivism naturally bubbled up to the state level, notably in Wisconsin, which became a yeasty laboratory of reform.
The governor of the state, pompadoured Robert M.
(Fighting Bob) La Follette,  was an undersized but overbearing crusader who emerged as the most militant of the progressive Republican leaders.
After a desperate fight with entrenched monopoly, he reached the governors chair in 1901.
Routing the lumber and railroad interests, he wrested considerable control from the crooked corporations and returned it to the people.
He also perfected a scheme for regulating public utilities, while laboring in close association with experts on the faculty of the state university at Madison.
Other states marched steadily toward the progressive camp, as they undertook to regulate railroads and trusts, chiefly through public utilities commissions.
Oregon was not far behind Wisconsin, and California made giant bootstrides under the stocky Hiram W. Johnson.
Elected Republican  governor in 1910, this dynamic prosecutor of grafters helped break the dominant grip of the Southern Pacific Railroad on California politics and then, like La Follette, set up a political machine of his own.
Heavily whiskered Charles Evans Hughes, the able and audacious reformist Republican governor of New York, had earlier gained national fame as an investigator of malpractices by gas and insurance companies and by the coal trust.
Women proved themselves an indispensable part of the progressive army.
A crucial focus for womens activism was the settlement house movement (see p.
565).
At a time when women could neither vote nor hold political office, settlement houses offered a side door to public life.
They exposed middle-class women to the problems plaguing Americas cities, including poverty, political corruption, and intolerable working and living conditions.
They also gave them the skills and confidence to attack those evils.
The womens club movement provided an even broader civic entryway for many middle-class women.
Literary clubs, where educated women met to improve themselves with poetry and prose, had existed for decades.
But in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, many of these clubs set aside Shakespeare and Henry James for social issues and current events.
Dante has been dead for several centuries, observed the president of the General Federation of Womens Clubs in 1904.
I think it is time that we dropped the study of his  turned our attention to our own.
Nineteenth-century notions of separate spheres dictated that a womans place was in the home, so most female progressives defended their new activities as an extensionnot a rejectionof the traditional roles of wife and mother.
Thus they were often drawn to moral and maternal issues like keeping children out of smudgy mills and sweltering sweatshops, attacking the scourge of tuberculosis bred in airless tenements, winning pensions for mothers with dependent children, and ensuring that only safe food products found their way to the family table.
Female activists agitated through organizations like the Womens Trade Union League and the National Consumers League, as well as through two new federal agencies, the Childrens Bureau (1912) and the Womens Bureau (1920), both in the Department of Labor.
These wedges into the federal bureaucracy, however small, gave female reformers a national stage for social investigation and  advocacy.
Campaigns for factory reform and temperance particularly attracted women foot soldiers.
Unsafe and unsanitary sweatshopsfactories where workers toiled long hours for low wageswere a public scandal in many cities.
Florence Kelley, a former resident of Jane Addamss Hull House, became the state of Illinoiss first chief factory inspector and one of the nations leading advocates for improved factory conditions.
In 1899 Kelley took control of the newly founded National Consumers League, which mobilized female consumers to pressure for laws safeguarding women and children in the workplace.
In the landmark case  sading attorney Louis D. Brandeis persuaded the Supreme Court to accept the constitutionality of laws protecting women workers by presenting evidence of the harmful effects of factory labor on womens weaker bodies.
Although this argument calling for special protection for women seemed discriminatory by later standards and closed many male jobs to women, progressives at the time hailed Brandeiss achievement as a triumph over existing legal doctrine, which afforded employers total control over the workplace.
The American  C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 Court records provide notably fruitful sources for historians.
They not only tell often-colorful stories about the lives of ordinary men and women caught up in the legal system; they also by their very nature testify to the norms and values that lawyers employ to make their cases and that judges invoke to explain their decisions.
The case of  instructive on both counts.
The official Supreme Court records tell how on September 4, 1905, Joe Haselbock, a supervisor in Curt Mullers Grand Laundry in Portland, Oregon, asked an employee, Mrs.
E. Gotcher, to remain after hours to do an extra load of laundry.
That request violated Oregons law prohibiting women from working more than ten hours per day.
Mrs.
Gotcher later complained to the authorities, and Muller was fined $10.
Muller refused to pay, and took his case all the way to the United States Supreme Court.
In its landmark decision, the Court upheld the constitutionality of the Oregon statute, and Muller at last had to cough up his fine.
On what grounds did the Court justify its ruling?
What does Justice Brewers argument on behalf of the Courts decision suggest about the cultural identity and social role of women in earlytwentieth-century American society?
That womans physical structure and the performance of material functions place her at a disadvantage in the struggle for subsistence is obvious.
This is especially true when the burdens of motherhood are upon her.
and as healthy mothers are essential to vigorous offspring, the physical well-being of woman becomes an object of public interest and care in order to preserve the strength and vigor of the race.
Still again, history discloses the fact that woman has always been dependent upon man.
He established his control at the outset by superior physical strength, and this control in various forms, with diminishing intensity, has continued to the present.
It is still true that in the struggle for subsistence she is not an equal competitor with her brother.
Differentiated by these matters from the other sex, she is properly placed in a class by herself, and legislation designed for her protection may be sustained, even when like legislation is not necessary for men, and could not be sustained.
It is impossible to close ones eyes to the fact that she still looks to her brother and depends upon him.
The two sexes differ in structure of body, in the functions to be performed by each, in the amount of physical strength, in the capacity for long continued labor, particularly when done standing, the influence of vigorous health upon the future well-being of the race, the self-reliance which enables one to assert full rights, and in the capacity to maintain the struggle for subsistence.
This difference justifies a difference in legislation, and upholds that which is designed to compensate for some of the burdens which rest upon her.
We have not referred in this discussion to the denial of the elective franchise in the state of Oregon, for while that may disclose  a lack of political equality in all things with her brother, that is not of itself decisive.
The reason runs deeper, and rests in the inherent  difference between the two sexes, and in  the different functions in life which they  perform.
welfare state that emerged from female activism focused more on protecting women and children than on granting benefits to everyone, as was the case in much of western Europe, with its stronger labor movements.
Crusaders for these humane measures did not always have smooth sailing.
One dismaying setback came in 1905, when the Supreme Court, in  v.  a ten-hour day for bakers.
Yet the reformist progressive wave finally washed up into the judiciary, and in 1917 the Court upheld a ten-hour law for factory workers.
Laws regulating factories were worthless if not enforced, a truth horribly demonstrated by a lethal fire in 1911 at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City.
Locked doors and other flagrant violations of the fire code turned the factory into a death trap.
One hundred forty-six workers, most of them young immigrant women, were incinerated or leapt from eighthand ninth-story windows to their deaths.
Lashed by the public outcry, including a massive strike by women in the needle trades, the New York legislature passed much stronger laws regulating the hours and conditions of sweatshop toil.
Other legislatures followed, and by 1917 thirty states had put workers compensation laws on the books, providing insurance to workers injured in industrial accidents.
Gradually the concept of the employers responsibility to society was replacing the old dogeat-dog philosophy of unregulated free enterprise.
Corner saloons, with their shutter doors, naturally attracted the ire and fire of progressives.
Alcohol was intimately connected with prostitution in red-light districts, with the drunken voter, with crooked city officials dominated by booze interests, and with the blowsy boss who counted poker chips by night and miscounted ballots by day (including the cemetery vote).
By 1900 cities like New York and San Francisco had one saloon for about every two hundred people.
Antiliquor campaigners received powerful support from several militant organizations, notably the Womans Christian Temperance Union (WCTU).
Founder Frances E. Willard, who would fall to her knees in prayer on saloon floors, mobilized nearly  1 million women to make the world homelike and built the WCTU into the largest organization of women in the world.
She found a vigorous ally in the Anti-Saloon League, which was aggressive, well organized, and well financed.
Caught up in the crusade, some states and numerous counties passed dry laws, which controlled, restricted, or abolished alcohol.
The big cities were generally wet, for they had a large immigrant vote accustomed in the Old Country to the free flow of wine and beer.
When World War I erupted in 1914, nearly one-half of the population lived in dry territory, and nearly three-fourths of the total area had outlawed saloons.
Demon Rum was groggy and about to be flooredtemporarily by the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919.
Theodore Roosevelt, although something of an imperialistic busybody abroad, was touched by the progressive wave at home.
Like other reformers, he C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 feared that the public interest was being submerged in the drifting seas of indifference.
Everybodys interest was nobodys interest.
Roosevelt decided to make it his.
His sportsmans instincts spurred him into demanding a Square Deal for capital, labor, and the public at large.
Broadly speaking, the presidents program embraced three Cs: control of the corporations, consumer protection, and conservation of natural resources.
The Square Deal for labor received its acid test in 1902, when a crippling strike broke out in the anthracite coal mines of Pennsylvania.
Some 140,000 besooted workers, many of them illiterate immigrants, had long been frightfully exploited and accident-plagued.
They demanded, among other improvements, a 20 percent increase in pay and a reduction of the working day from ten to nine hours.
Unsympathetic mine owners, confident that  a chilled public would react against the miners, refused to arbitrate or even negotiate.
One of  their spokesmen, multimillionaire George F. Baer, reflected the high-and-mighty attitude of certain ungenerous employers.
Workers, he wrote, would be cared for not by the labor agitators, but by the Christian men to whom God in His infinite wisdom has given the control of the property interests of this country.
As coal supplies dwindled, factories and schools were forced to shut down, and even hospitals felt the icy grip of winter.
Desperately seeking a solution, Roosevelt summoned representatives of the striking miners and the mine owners to the White House.
He was profoundly annoyed by the extraordinary stupidity and bad temper of the woodenheaded gentry who operated the mines.
As he later confessed, if it had not been for the dignity of his high office, he would have taken one of them by the seat of the breeches and chucked him out of the window.
Roosevelt finally resorted to his trusty big stick when he threatened to seize the mines and operate them with federal troops.
Faced with this first-timeever threat to use federal bayonets against capital, rather than labor, the owners grudgingly consented to arbitration.
A compromise decision ultimately gave the miners a 10 percent pay boost and a working day of nine hours.
But their union was not officially recognized as a bargaining agent.
Keenly aware of the mounting antagonisms between capital and labor, Roosevelt urged Congress to create the new Department of Commerce and Labor.
This goal was achieved in 1903.
(Ten years later the agency was split in two.
) An important arm of the newborn cabinet body was the Bureau of Corporations, which was authorized to probe businesses engaged in interstate commerce.
The bureau was highly useful in helping to break the stranglehold of monopoly and in clearing the road for the era of trust-busting.
The sprawling railroad octopus sorely needed restraint.
The Interstate Commerce Commission,  created in 1887 as a feeble sop to the public, had proved woefully inadequate.
Railroad barons could simply appeal the commissions decisions on rates  to the federal courtsa process that might take ten years.
Spurred by the former-cowboy president, Congress passed effective railroad legislation, beginning with the Elkins Act of 1903.
This curb was aimed primarily at the rebate evil.
Heavy fines could now be imposed both on the railroads that gave rebates and on the shippers that accepted them.
Still more effective was the Hepburn Act of 1906.
Free passes, with their hint of bribery, were He sounded in my heart the first trumpet call of the new time that was to be.
I had never known such a man as he, and never shall again.
He overcame me.
And in the hour or two we spent that day at lunch, and in a walk down F Street, he poured into my heart such visions, such ideals, such hopes, such a new attitude toward life and patriotism and the meaning of things, as I had never dreamed men had.
After that  I was his man.
severely restricted.
The once-infantile Interstate Commerce Commission was expanded, and its reach was extended to include express companies, sleeping-car companies, and pipelines.
For the first time, the commission was given real molars when it was authorized, on complaint of shippers, to nullify existing rates and stipulate maximum rates.
Railroads also provided Roosevelt with an opportunity to brandish his antitrust bludgeon.
gressive era.
Roosevelt believed that these industrial behemoths, with their efficient means of production, had arrived to stay.
He concluded that there were good trusts, with public consciences, and bad trusts, which lusted greedily for power.
He was determined to respond to the popular outcry against the trusts but was also determined not to throw out the baby with the bathwater by indiscriminately smashing all large businesses.
Roosevelt, as a trustbuster, first burst into the headlines in 1902 with an attack on the Northern Securities Company, a railroad holding company organized by financial titan J. P. Morgan and empire builder James J. Hill.
These Napoleonic moguls of money sought to achieve a virtual monopoly of the railroads in the Northwest.
Roosevelt was therefore challenging the most regal potentates of the industrial aristocracy.
The railway promoters appealed to the Supreme Court, which in 1904 upheld Roosevelts antitrust suit and ordered the Northern Securities Company to be dissolved.
The  decision jolted Wall Street and angered big business but greatly enhanced Roosevelts reputation as a trust smasher.
Roosevelts big stick crashed down on other giant monopolies, as he initiated over forty legal proceedings against them.
The Supreme Court in 1905 declared the beef trust illegal, and the heavy fist of justice fell upon monopolists controlling sugar, fertilizer, harvesters, and other key products.
Much mythology has inflated Roosevelts reputation as a trustbuster.
The Rough Rider understood the political popularity of monopoly-smashing, but he did not consider it sound economic policy.
Combination and integration, he felt, were the hallmarks of the age, and to try to stem the tide of economic progress by political means he considered the rankest folly.
Bigness was not necessarily badness, so why punish success?
Roosevelts real purpose in assaulting the Goliaths of industry was symbolic: to prove conclusively that the government, not private business, ruled the country.
He believed in regulating, not fragmenting, the big business combines.
The threat of dissolution, he felt, might make the sultans of the smokestacks more amenable to federal regulationas it did.
In truth, Roosevelt never swung his trustcrushing stick with maximum force.
In many ways the huge industrial behemoths were healthier though perhaps more tameat the end of Roosevelts reign than they had been before.
His successor, William Howard Taft, actually busted more trusts than TR did.
In one celebrated instance in 1907, Roosevelt even gave his personal blessing to J. P. Morgans plan to have U.S.
Steel absorb the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company, without fear of antitrust reprisals.
When Taft then launched a suit against U.S.
Steel in 1911, the political reaction from TR was explosive.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 Roosevelt backed a noteworthy measure in 1906 that benefited both corporations and consumers.
Big meatpackers were being shut out of certain European markets because some American meat from the small packinghouses, claimed the giants had been found to be tainted.
Foreign governments were even threatening to ban all American meat imports by throwing out the good beef with the bad botulism.
At the same time, American consumers hungered for safer canned products.
Their appetite for reform was whetted by Upton Sinclairs sensational novel   tended his revolting tract to focus attention on the plight of the workers in the big canning factories, but instead he appalled the public with his description of disgustingly unsanitary food products.
(As he put it, he aimed for the nations heart but hit its stomach.
) The book described in noxious detail the filth, disease, and putrefaction in Chicagos damp, illventilated slaughterhouses.
Many readers, including Roosevelt, were so sickened that for a time they found meat unpalatable.
The president was moved by the loathsome mess in Chicago to appoint a special investigating commission, whose cold-blooded report almost outdid Sinclairs novel.
It related how piles of poisoned rats, rope ends, splinters, and other debris were scooped up and canned as potted ham.
A cynical jingle of the time ran, Backed by a nauseated public, Roosevelt induced Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906.
It decreed that the preparation of meat shipped over state lines would be subject to federal inspection from corral to can.
Although the largest packers resisted certain features of the act, they accepted it as an opportunity to drive their smaller, fly-by-night competitors out of business.
At the same time, they could receive the governments seal of approval on their exports.
As a companion to the Meat Inspection Act, the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 was designed to prevent the adulteration and mislabeling of foods and pharmaceuticals.
Wasteful Americans, assuming that their natural resources were inexhaustible, had looted and polluted their incomparable domain with unparalleled speed and greed.
Western ranchers and timbermen were especially eager to accelerate the destructive process, for they panted to build up the country, and the environmental consequences be hanged.
But even before the end of the nineteenth century, farvisioned leaders saw that such a squandering of the nations birthright would have to be halted, or America would sink from resource richness to despoiled dearth.
A first feeble step toward conservation had been taken with the Desert Land Act of 1877, under which the federal government sold arid land cheaply on the condition that the purchaser irrigate the thirsty soil within three years.
More successful was the Forest Reserve Act of 1891, authorizing the president to set aside public forests as national parks and other reserves.
Under this statute some 46 million acres of magnificent trees were rescued from the lumbermans saw in the 1890s and preserved for posterity.
The Carey Act of 1894 distributed federal land to the states on the condition that it be irrigated and settled.
A new day in the history of conservation dawned with Roosevelt.
Huntsman, naturalist, rancher, lover of the great outdoors, he was appalled by the pillaging of timber and mineral resources.
Other dedicated conservationists, notably Gifford Pinchot, head of the federal Division of Forestry, had broken important ground before him.
But Roosevelt seized the banner of leadership and charged into the fray with all the weight of his prestige, his energy, his firsthand knowledge, and his slashing invective.
The thirst of the desert still unslaked, Congress responded to the whip of the Rough Rider by passing the landmark Newlands Act of 1902.
Washington was authorized to collect money from the sale of public lands in the sun-baked western states and then use these funds for the development of irrigation projects.
Settlers repaid the cost of reclamation from their now-productive soil, and the money was put into a revolving fund to finance more such enterprises.
The giant Roosevelt Dam, constructed on Arizonas Salt River, was appropriately dedicated by Roosevelt in 1911.
Thanks to this epochal legislation, dozens of dams were thrown across virtually every major western river in the ensuing decades.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 We are prone to speak of the resources of this country as inexhaustible; this is not so.
The mineral wealth of the country, the coal, iron, oil, gas, and the like, does not reproduce itself, and therefore is certain to be exhausted ultimately; and wastefulness in dealing with it to-day means that our descendants will feel the exhaustion a generation or two before they otherwise would.
Roosevelt pined to preserve the nations shrinking forests.
By 1900 only about a quarter of the once-vast virgin timberlands remained standing.
Lumbermen had already logged off most of the firstgrowth timber from Maine to Michigan, and the sharp thud of their axes was beginning to split the silence in the great fir forests of the Pacific slope.
Roosevelt proceeded to set aside in federal reserves some 125 million acres, or almost three times the acreage thus saved from the saw by his three predecessors.
He similarly earmarked millions of acres of coal deposits, as well as water resources useful for irrigation and power.
To set a shining example, in 1902 he banned Christmas trees from the White House.
Conservation, including reclamation, may have been Roosevelts most enduring tangible achievement.
He was buoyed in this effort by an upwelling national mood of concern about the disappearance of the frontierbelieved to be the source of such national characteristics as individualism and democracy.
An increasingly citified people worried that too much civilization might not be good for the national soul.
City dwellers snapped up Jack Londons  nature, and urban youngsters made the outdoororiented Boy Scouts of America the countrys largest youth organization.
The Sierra Club, founded in 1892, dedicated itself to preserving the wildness of the western landscape.
The preservationists lost a major battle in 1913 when the federal government allowed the city of San Francisco to build a dam for its municipal water supply in the spectacular, high-walled Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite National Park.
The Hetch Hetchy controversy laid bare a deep division among conservationists that persists to the present day.
To the preservationists of the Sierra Club, including famed naturalist John Muir, Hetch Hetchy was a temple The object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness, but the making of prosperous homes.
Every other consideration comes as secondary.
The test of utility .
implies that no lands will be permanently reserves which can serve the people better in any other way.
umans have long been awed by nature, but they have also yearned to be its masters.
Native American peoples did what they could to shape the natural environment to serve their purposesburning forest and grasslands, for example, to improve hunting habitatsbut they lacked the tools to make Mother Earth bow deeply to their will.
The earliest European colonists saw North America as a howling wilderness and toiled mightily with ax and plow to tame  it.
By the mid-nineteenth century, Americans commanded powerful new technologies like the railroad and steam-powered drills and dredges, which promised unbridled dominion over the natural world.
Only then did voices begin to be heard in defense of the wounded earththe faint first stirrings of what would come to be called environmentalism.
In a pattern that would often be repeated, natures earliest defenders tended to be well-off townsfolk and city dwellers, like Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson.
The Americans most likely to appreciate the value of the pristine wilderness, it seemed, were those who had ceased to struggle against it.
(Cities, not log cabins, produce Sierra Clubbers, one historian noted.
) For the loggers, miners, and farmers who continued to sweat their living out of natures grudging embrace, concern for environmental niceties often seemed like the sanctimonious piety of a privileged elite.
By the dawn of the twentieth century, many genteel, urban Americans had come to romanticize their pioneer forebears.
They reinvented hunting and fishing as sports for the well-to-do, not simply as ways to put food on the table.
Preservationists like John Muir waxed lyrical about the mystic allure of unspoiled nature.
Seizing the popular mood, Theodore Roosevelt deliberately constructed a public image of himself as a manly outdoorsmanraising cattle in the Dakotas, shooting lions in Africa, rafting down wild rivers in the Amazon basinand as president he greatly expanded the system of national forests.
But Roosevelt was also a pioneer of another sortas a prominent promoter of the progressive-era conservation movement, composed of a loose coalition of scientists, bureaucrats, and businesspeople dependent on Americas endowment of natural resources.
Progressive conservationists believed that nature must be neither uncritically reverenced nor wastefully exploited, but must instead be efficiently utilized.
Thus the same TR who admired the wonders of Yosemite Valley in the company of John Muir also supported the professional forester Gifford Pinchot, who declared that the object of our forest policy is not to preserve the forests because they are beautiful or because they are refuges for the wild creatures of the wilderness, but the making of prosperous homes.
Use must be the test by which the forester tries himself.
Pinchots rational use philosophy guided Americas natural resource policy until the midtwentieth century.
It justified the systematic harvesting of millions of trees in the sprawling national forests whose boundaries Roosevelt had expanded, and the drowning of vast river valleys behind massive dams that Roosevelts Reclamation Service helped to build.
This attitude toward nature triumphed in the New Deal era of the 1930s, when the federal government initiated colossal projects that undertook nothing less than reengineering the face of the continentincluding the Tennessee Valley Authority, the Soil Conservation Service, and the Shelterbelt tree-planting project on the Great Plains.
The huge reach of these New Deal projects also introduced millions of Americans for the first time to the concept that nature had to be treated with respect, helping to stimulate the postWorld War II grassroots environmental movement.
The rise of ecological science in the postWorld War II era fundamentally changed the debate about the relation of nature to civilization.
Ecologists charged that the apparent rationality of the earlier conservationists dangerously neglected the fateful intricacies of biological systems.
They called attention to the stunningly complex webs of interrelationships that linked together seemingly unrelated organisms and to the perils of tampering even slightly with the delicate biological fabrics that nature had taken millennia to weave.
Rachel Carson helped to popularize the new outlook in her sensational 1962 expos,  birds, plants, and animalsincluding humans.
The advent of ecological studies coincided with a revival of preservationist sentiment, especially in the suburbs, where Americans increasingly dwelled.
Hordes of affluent baby boomers took to Americas trails, slopes, and waterways to hike, bike, ski, fish, boat, and otherwise recreateoften on public lands like Arizonas wondrous Grand Canyon National Park, or public waters like Utahs shimmering (and man-made) Lake Powell.
Membership in environmental organizations such as the Sierra Club and the Audubon Society soared, as a generation infatuated with nature demanded a clean and green world.
The first celebration of Earth Day, on April 22, 1970, marked the political maturation of modern-day environmentalism, which wedded scientific analysis with respect for natures majesty.
That same year saw the creation of the federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), soon followed by the Endangered Species Act and other legislation designed to regulate the relationship between humans and nature.
At the outset of the twenty-first century, developments like global warming served dramatic notice that planet earth was the biggest ecological system of them allone that did not recognize national boundaries.
Yet while Americans took pride in the efforts they had made to clean up their own turf, who were they, having long since consumed much of their own timberlands, to tell the Brazilians that they should not cut down the Amazon rain forest?
Who were they, having tamed virtually all their own freeflowing waters, to tell the Chinese not to dam their rivers?
For the peoples of the developing world, struggling to match Americas standard of living, environmentalists often seemed like spoiled spoilers, preaching the same privileged pieties that had infuriated generations of working Americans.
of nature that should be held inviolable by the civilizing hand of humanity.
But other conservationists, among them President Roosevelts chief forester, Gifford Pinchot, believed that wilderness was waste.
Pinchot and Roosevelt wanted to  nations natural endowment intelligently.
In their eyes they had to battle on two fronts: against greedy commercial interests who abused nature, as well as against romantic preservationists in thrall to simple woodman-spare-that-tree sentimentality.
Under Roosevelt, professional foresters and engineers developed a policy of multiple-use resource management.
They sought to combine recreation, sustained-yield logging, watershed protection, and summer stock grazing on the same expanse of federal land.
At first many westerners resisted the federal management of natural resources, but they soon learned how to take advantage of new agencies like the Forest Service and especially the Bureau of Reclamation.
The largest ranches and timber companies in particular figured out how to work hand in glove with federal conservation programs devoted to the rational, large-scale, and long-term use of natural resources.
The one-man-and-a-mule logger or the one-man-and-a-dog sheepherder had little clout in the new resources bureaucracy.
Singleperson enterprises were shouldered aside, in the C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 interest of efficiency, by the combined bulk of big business and big government.
Roosevelt was handily elected president in his own right in 1904 and entered his new term buoyed by his enormous personal popularitythe cuddly teddy bear honored one of his bear-hunting exploits (when he saved the life of a cub), and children piped vigorously on whistles modeled on his famous teeth.
Yet the conservative Republican bosses considered him as dangerous and unpredictable as a rattlesnake.
They grew increasingly restive as Roosevelt in his second term called ever more loudly for regulating the corporations, taxing incomes, and protecting workers.
Roosevelt, meanwhile, had partly defanged himself after his election in 1904 by announcing that under no circumstances would he be a candidate for a third term.
This was a tactical blunder, for the power of the king wanes when the people know he will be dead in four years.
Roosevelt suffered a sharp setback in 1907, when a short but punishing panic descended on Wall Street.
The financial flurry featured frightened runs on banks, suicides, and criminal indictments against speculators.
The financial world hastened to blame Roosevelt for the storm.
It cried that this quack had unsettled industry with his boat-rocking tactics.
Conservatives damned him as Theodore the Meddler and branded the current distress the Roosevelt panic.
The hot-tempered president angrily lashed back at his critics when he accused certain malefactors of great wealth of having deliberately engineered the monetary crisis to force the government to relax its assaults on trusts.
Fortunately, the panic of 1907 paved the way for long-overdue fiscal reforms.
Precipitating a currency shortage, the flurry laid bare the need for a more elastic medium of exchange.
In a crisis of this sort, the hard-pressed banks were unable to increase the volume of money in circulation, and those with ample reserves were reluctant to lend to their less fortunate competitors.
Congress in 1908 responded by passing the Aldrich-Vreeland Act, which authorized national banks to issue emergency currency backed by various kinds of collateral.
The path was thus smoothed for the momentous Federal Reserve Act of 1913 (see p.
692).
Still warmly popular in 1908, Roosevelt could easily have won a second presidential nomination and almost certainly the election.
But he felt bound by his impulsive postelection promise after his victory in 1904.
The departing president thus naturally sought a successor who would carry out my policies.
The man of his choice was amiable, ample-girthed, and huge-framed William Howard Taft, secretary of war and a mild progressive.
As an heir apparent, he had often been called upon in Roosevelts absence to sit on the lidall 350 pounds of him.
At the Republican convention of 1908 in Chicago, Roosevelt used his control of the party machinerythe steamrollerto push through Tafts nomination on the first ballot.
Three weeks later, in mile-high Denver, in the heart of silver country, the Democrats nominated twice-beaten William Jennings Bryan.
The dull campaign of 1908 featured the rotund Taft and the now-balding Boy Orator both trying to don the progressive Roosevelt mantle.
The solid Judge Taft read cut-and-dried speeches, while Bryan griped that Roosevelt had stolen his policies from the Bryanite camp.
A majority of voters chose stability with Roosevelt-endorsed Taft, who polled 321 electoral votes to 162 for Bryan.
The victors popular count was 7,675,320 to 6,412,294.
The elections only surprise came from the Socialists, who amassed 420,793 votes for Eugene V. Debs, the hero of the Pullman strike of 1894 (see pp.
614615).
Roosevelt, ever in the limelight, left soon after the election for a lion hunt in Africa.
His numerous enemies clinked glasses while toasting Health to the lions, and a few irreverently prayed that some big cat would do its duty.
But TR survived, still bursting with energy at the age of fifty-one in 1909.
Roosevelt was branded by his adversaries as a wild-eyed radical, but his reputation as an eater of errant industrialists now seems inflated.
He fought many a sham battle, and the number of laws he inspired was certainly not in proportion to the amount of noise he emitted.
He was often under attack from the reigning business lords, but the more enlightened of them knew that they had a friend in the White House.
Roosevelt should be remembered first and foremost as the cowboy who started to tame the bucking bronco of adolescent capitalism, thus ensuring it a long adult life.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 TRs enthusiasm and perpetual youthfulness, like an overgrown Boy Scouts, appealed to the young of all ages.
You must always remember, a British diplomat cautioned his colleagues, that the president is about six.
He served as a political lightning rod to protect capitalists against popular indignationand against socialism, which Roosevelt regarded as ominous.
He strenuously sought the middle road between unbridled individualism and paternalistic collectivism.
His conservation crusade, which tried to mediate between the romantic wilderness-preservationists and the rapacious resource-predators, was probably his most typical and his most lasting achievement.
Several other contributions of Roosevelt lasted beyond his presidency.
First, he greatly enlarged the power and prestige of the presidential officeand masterfully developed the technique of using the big stick of publicity as a political bludgeon.
Second, he helped shape the progressive movement and beyond it the liberal reform campaigns later in the century.
His Square Deal, in a sense, was the grandfather of the New Deal later launched by his fifth cousin, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Finally, to a greater degree than any of his predecessors, TR opened the eyes of Americans to the fact that they shared the world with other nations.
As a great power, they had fallen heir to responsibilitiesand had been seized by ambitionsfrom which there was no escaping.
William Howard Taft, with his ruddy complexion and upturned mustache, at first inspired widespread confidence.
Everybody loves a fat man, the saying goes, and the jovial Taft, with mirthquakes of laughter bubbling up from his abundant abdomen, was personally popular.
He had graduated second in his class at Yale and had established an enviable reputation as a lawyer and judge, though he was widely regarded as hostile to labor unions.
He had been  a trusted administrator under Rooseveltin the Philippines, at home, and in Cuba, where he had served capably as a troubleshooter.
But good old Will suffered from lethal political handicaps.
Roosevelt had led the conflicting elements of the Republican party by the sheer force of his personality.
Taft, in contrast, had none of the arts of a dashing political leader and none of Roosevelts zest for the fray.
Recoiling from the clamor of controversy, he generally adopted an attitude of passivity toward Congress.
He was a poor judge of public opinion, and his candor made him a chronic victim of foot-in-mouth disease.
Peaceful Bill was no doubt a mild progressive, but at heart he was more wedded to the status quo than to change.
Significantly, his cabinet did not contain a single representative of the partys insurgent wing, which was on fire for reform of current abuses, especially the tariff.
Though ordinarily lethargic, Taft bestirred himself  to use the lever of American investments to boost American political interests abroad, an approach to foreign policy that his critics denounced as dollar diplomacy.
Washington warmly encouraged Wall Street bankers to sluice their surplus dollars into foreign areas of strategic concern to the United States, especially in the Far East and in the regions critical to the security of the Panama Canal.
By preempting investors from rival powers, such as Germany, New York bankers would thus strengthen American defenses and foreign policies, while bringing further prosperity to their homelandand to themselves.
The almighty dollar thereby supplanted the big stick.
Chinas Manchuria was the object of Tafts most spectacular effort to inject the reluctant dollar into the Far Eastern theater.
Newly ambitious Japan and imperialistic Russia, recent foes, controlled the railroads of this strategic province.
President Taft saw  in the Manchurian railway monopoly a possible strangulation of Chinese economic interests and  a consequent slamming of the Open Door in the faces of U.S.
merchants.
In 1909 Secretary of State Dont flinch, dont foul, and hit the line hard.
Philander C. Knox blunderingly proposed that a group of American and foreign bankers buy the Manchurian railroads and then turn them over to China under a self-liquidating arrangement.
Both Japan and Russia, unwilling to be jockeyed out of their dominant position, bluntly rejected Knoxs overtures.
Taft was showered with ridicule.
Another dangerous new trouble spot was the revolution-riddled Caribbeannow virtually a Yankee lake.
Hoping to head off trouble, Washington urged Wall Street bankers to pump dollars into the financial vacuums in Honduras and Haiti to keep out foreign funds.
The United States, under the Monroe Doctrine, would not permit foreign nations to intervene, and consequently felt obligated to put its money where its mouth was to prevent economic and political instability.
Again necessity was the mother of armed Caribbean intervention.
Sporadic disorders in palmfronded Cuba, Honduras, and the Dominican Republic brought American forces to these countries to restore order and protect American investment.
A revolutionary upheaval in Nicaragua, regarded as perilously close to the nearly completed Panama Canal, resulted in the landing of twenty-five hundred marines in 1912.
The marines remained in Nicaragua for thirteen years.
(See the map on p.
695.
) Taft managed to gain some fame as a smasher of monopolies.
The ironic truth is that the colorless Taft brought 90 suits against the trusts during his 4 years in office, as compared with some 44 for Roosevelt in 7 1  2 years.
By fateful happenstance the most sensational judicial actions during the Taft regime came in 1911.
In that year the Supreme Court ordered the dissolution of the mighty Standard Oil Company, which was judged to be a combination in restraint of trade in violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890.
At the same time, the Court handed down its famous rule of reason.
This doctrine held that only those combinations that unreasonably restrained trade were illegal.
This fine-print proviso ripped a huge hole in the governments antitrust net.
Even more explosively, in 1911 Taft decided to press an antitrust suit against the U.S.
Steel Corporation.
This initiative infuriated Roosevelt, who had personally been involved in one of the mergers that prompted the suit.
Once Roosevelts protg, President Taft was increasingly taking on the role of his antagonist.
The stage was being set for a bruising confrontation.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 Lowering the barriers of the formidable protective tariffthe Mother of Trustswas high on the agenda of the progressive members of the Republican party, and they at first thought they had a friend and ally in Taft.
True to his campaign promises to reduce tariffs, Taft called Congress into special session in March 1909.
The House proceeded to pass a moderately reductive bill, but senatorial reactionaries, led by Senator Nelson W. Aldrich of Rhode Island, tacked on hundreds of upward tariff revisions.
Only items such as hides, sea moss, and canary-bird seed were left on the duty-free list.
After much handwringing, Taft signed the Payne-Aldrich Bill, thus betraying his campaign promises and outraging the progressive wing of his party, heavily drawn from the Midwest.
Taft rubbed salt in the wound by proclaiming it the best bill that the Republican party ever passed.
Taft revealed a further knack for shooting himself in the foot in his handling of conservation.
The portly president was a dedicated conservationist, and his contributions actually equaled or surpassed those of Roosevelt.
He established the Bureau of Mines to control mineral resources, rescued millions of acres of western coal lands from exploitation, and protected water-power sites from private development.
But those praiseworthy accomplishments were largely erased in the public mind by the noisy Ballinger-Pinchot quarrel that erupted in 1910.
When Secretary of the Interior Richard Ballinger opened public lands in Wyoming, Montana, and Alaska to corporate development, he was sharply criticized by Gifford Pinchot, chief of the Agriculture Departments Division of Forestry and a stalwart Rooseveltian.
When Taft dismissed Pinchot on the narrow grounds of insubordination, a storm of protest arose from conservationists and from Roosevelts friends, who were legion.
The whole unsavory episode further widened the growing rift between the president and the former president, one-time bosom political partners.
The reformist wing of the Republican party was now up in arms, while Taft was being pushed increasingly into the embrace of the stand-pat Old Guard.
By the spring of 1910, the Grand Old Party was split wide open, owing largely to the clumsiness of Taft.
A suspicious Roosevelt returned triumphantly to New York in June 1910 and shortly thereafter stirred up a tempest.
Unable to keep silent, he took to the stump at Osawatomie, Kansas, and shocked the Old Guard with a flaming speech.
The doctrine that he proclaimedpopularly known as the New Nationalismurged the national government to increase its power to remedy economic and social abuses.
Weakened by these internal divisions, the Republicans lost badly in the congressional elections of 1910.
In a victory of landslide proportions, the Democrats emerged with 228 seats, leaving the once-dominant Republicans with only 161.
In a further symptom of the reforming temper of the times, a Socialist representative, Austrian-born Victor L. Berger, was elected from Milwaukee.
* The Republicans, by virtue of holdovers, retained the Senate, 51 to 41, but the insurgents in their midst were numerous enough to make that hold precarious.
The sputtering uprising in Republican ranks had now blossomed into a full-fledged revolt.
Early in 1911 the National Progressive Republican League was formed, with the fiery, white-maned Senator La Follette of Wisconsin its leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination.
The assumption was that Roosevelt, an antithird termer, would not permit himself to be drafted.
But the restless Rough Rider began to change his views about third terms as he saw Taft, hand in glove with the hated Old Guard, discard my policies.
In February 1912 Roosevelt formally wrote to seven state governors that he was willing to accept the Republican nomination.
His reasoning was that the thirdterm tradition applied to three  terms.
Exuberantly he cried, My hat is in the ring!
and The fight is on and I am stripped to the buff!
Roosevelt forthwith seized the Progressive  banner, while La Follette, who had served as a convenient pathbreaker, was protestingly elbowed aside.
Girded for battle, the Rough Rider came clattering into the presidential primaries then being held in many states.
He shouted through halfclenched teeth that the president had fallen under the thumb of the reactionary bosses and that, *He was eventually denied his seat in 1919, during a wave of antired hysteria.
although Taft means well, he means well feebly.
The once-genial Taft, now in a fighting mood, retorted by branding Roosevelt supporters emotionalists and neurotics.
A Taft-Roosevelt explosion was near in June 1912, when the Republican convention met in Chicago.
The Rooseveltites, who were about 100 delegates short of winning the nomination, challenged the right of some 250 Taft delegates to be seated.
Most of these contests were arbitrarily settled in favor of Taft, whose supporters held the throttle of the convention steamroller.
The Roosevelt adherents, crying fraud and naked theft, in the end refused to vote, and Taft triumphed.
Roosevelt, the supposedly good sportsman, refused to quit the game.
Having tasted for the first time the bitter cup of defeat, he was now on fire to lead a third-party crusade.
C HAPTER 29 Progressivism and the Republican Roosevelt, 19011912 Commission system established in  Galveston, Texas Progressive Robert La Follette elected  governor of Wisconsin Lincoln Steffens and Ida Tarbell publish  muckraking exposs Anthracite coal strike Newlands Act Department of Commerce and Labor  established Elkins Act Roosevelt defeats Alton B. Parker for  presidency Hepburn Act Upton Sinclair publishes  Meat Inspection Act Pure Food and Drug Act Roosevelt panic Taft defeats Bryan for presidency Aldrich-Vreeland Act Payne-Aldrich Tariff Ballinger-Pinchot affair Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire Standard Oil antitrust case U.S.
Steel Corporation antitrust suit Taft wins Republican nomination over  Roosevelt Seventeenth Amendment passed (direct  election of U.S.
senators) Federal Reserve Act For further reading, see page A20 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad  19121916 W OODROW W ILSON , T HE N EW F REEDOM , 1913 O ffice-hungry Democratsthe outs since 1897were jubilant over the disruptive Republican brawl at the convention in Chicago.
If they could come up with an outstanding reformist leader, they had an excellent chance to win the White House.
Such a leader appeared in Dr.
Woodrow Wilson, once a mild conservative but now a militant progressive.
Beginning professional life as a brilliant academic lecturer on government, he had risen in 1902 to the presidency of Princeton University, where he had achieved some sweeping educational reforms.
Wilson entered politics in 1910 when New Jersey bosses, needing a respectable front candidate for the governorship, offered him the nomination.
They expected to lead the academic novice by the nose, but to their surprise, Wilson waged a passionate reform campaign in which he assailed the predatory trusts and promised to return state government to the people.
Riding the crest of the progressive wave, the Schoolmaster in Politics was swept into office.
Once in the governors chair, Wilson drove through the legislature a sheaf of forward-looking measures that made reactionary New Jersey one of the more liberal states.
Filled with righteous indignation, Wilson revealed irresistible reforming zeal, burning eloquence, superb powers of leadership, and a refreshing habit of appealing over the heads of the scheming bosses to the sovereign people.
Now a figure of national eminence, Wilson was being widely mentioned for the presidency.
When the Democrats met at Baltimore in 1912, Wilson was nominated on the forty-sixth ballot, aided by William Jennings Bryans switch to his side.
The Democrats gave Wilson a strong progressive platform to run on; dubbed the New Freedom program, it included calls for stronger antitrust legislation, banking reform, and tariff reductions.
Surging events had meanwhile been thrusting Roosevelt to the fore as a candidate for the presidency on a third-party Progressive Republican ticket.
The fighting ex-cowboy, angered by his recent rebuff, was eager to lead the charge.
A pro-Roosevelt Progressive convention, with about two thousand delegates from forty states, assembled in Chicago during August 1912.
Dramatically symbolizing the rising political status of women, as well as Progressive support for the cause of social justice,  settlement-house pioneer Jane Addams placed  Roosevelts name in nomination for the presidency.
Roosevelt was applauded tumultuously as he cried in a vehement speech, We stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord!
The hosanna spirit of a religious revival meeting suffused the convention, as the hoarse delegates sang Onward Christian Soldiers and Battle Hymn of the Republic.
William Allen White, the caustic Kansas journalist, later wrote, Roosevelt bit me and I went mad.
Fired-up Progressives entered the campaign with righteousness and enthusiasm.
Roosevelt boasted that he felt as strong as a bull moose, and the bull moose took its place with the donkey and the elephant in the American political zoo.
As one poet whimsically put it, Roosevelt and Taft were bound to slit each others political throats; by dividing the Republican vote, they virtually guaranteed a Democratic victory.
The two antagonists tore into each other as only former friends can.
Death alone can take me out now, cried the once-jovial Taft, as he branded Roosevelt a dangerous egotist and a demagogue.
Roosevelt, fighting mad, assailed Taft as a fathead with the brain of a guinea pig.
Beyond the clashing personalities, the overshadowing question of the 1912 campaign was which of two varieties of progressivism would prevailRoosevelts New Nationalism or Wilsons New Freedom.
Both men favored a more active government role in economic and social affairs, but they disagreed sharply over specific strategies.
Roosevelt preached the theories spun out by the progressive thinker Herbert Croly in his book  (1910).
Croly and TR both favored continued consolidation of trusts and labor unions, paralleled by the growth of powerful regulatory agencies in Washington.
Roosevelt and his bull moosers also campaigned for woman suffrage and a broad program of social welfare, including minimum-wage laws and socialistic social insurance.
Clearly, the bull moose Progressives looked forward to the kind of activist welfare state that Franklin Roosevelts New Deal would one day make a reality.
Wilsons New Freedom, by contrast, favored small enterprise, entrepreneurship, and the free functioning of unregulated and unmonopolized markets.
The Democrats shunned social-welfare C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 proposals and pinned their economic faith on competitionon the man on the make, as Wilson put it.
The keynote of Wilsons campaign was not regulation but fragmentation of the big industrial combines, chiefly by means of vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws.
The election of 1912 thus offered the voters a choice not merely of policies but of political and economic philosophiesa rarity in U.S.
history.
The heat of the campaign cooled a bit when, in Milwaukee, Roosevelt was shot in the chest by a fanatic.
The Rough Rider suspended active campaigning for more than two weeks after delivering, with bull moose gameness and a bloody shirt, his scheduled speech.
Former professor Wilson won handily, with 435 electoral votes and 6,296,547 popular votes.
The third-party candidate, Roosevelt, finished second, receiving 88 electoral votes and 4,118,571 popular votes.
Taft won only 8 electoral votes and 3,486,720 popular votes (see the map on p.
690).
The election figures are fascinating.
Wilson, with only 41 percent of the popular vote, was clearly a minority president, though his party won a majority in Congress.
His popular total was actually smaller than Bryan had amassed in any of his three defeats, despite the increase in population.
Taft and Roosevelt together polled over 1.25 million more votes than the Democrats.
Progressivism rather than Wilson was the runaway winner.
Although the Democratic total obviously included many conservatives in the solid South, the combined progressive vote for Wilson and Roosevelt exceeded the tally of the more conservative Taft.
To the progressive tally must be added some support for the Socialist candidate, persistent Eugene V. Debs, who rolled up 900,672 votes, or more than twice as many as he had netted four years earlier.
Starry-eyed Socialists dreamed of being in the White House within eight years.
Roosevelts lone-wolf course was tragic both for himself and for his former Republican associates.
Perhaps, to rephrase William Allen White, he had bitten himself and gone mad.
The Progressive party, which was primarily a one-man show, had no future because it had elected few candidates to state and local offices; the Socialists, in contrast, elected more than a thousand.
Without patronage plums to hand out to the faithful workers, death by slow starvation was inevitable for the upstart party.
Yet the Progressives made a tremendous showing for a hastily organized third party and helped spur the enactment of many of their pet reforms by the Wilsonian  Democrats.
As for the Republicans, they were thrust into unaccustomed minority status in Congress for the next six years and were frozen out of the White House for eight years.
Taft himself had a fruitful old age.
He taught law for eight pleasant years at Yale University and in 1921 became chief justice of the Supreme Courta job for which he was far more happily suited than the presidency.
(Thomas) Woodrow Wilson, the second Democratic president since 1861, looked like the ascetic intellectual he was, with his clean-cut features, pinchedon eyeglasses, and trim figure.
Born in Virginia Woodrow Wilson Democratic 435 6,296,547 41% Theodore Roosevelt Progressive 88 4,118,571 27 William H. Taft Republican 8 3,486,720 23 Eugene V. Debs Socialist  900,672 6 E. W. Chafin Prohibition  206,275 1 A. E. Reimer Socialist-Labor  28,750 0.2 shortly before the Civil War and reared in Georgia and the Carolinas, the professor-politician was the first man from one of the seceded southern states to reach the White House since Zachary Taylor, sixtyfour years earlier.
The impact of Dixieland on young Tommy Wilson was profound.
He sympathized with the Confederacys gallant attempt to win its independence, a sentiment that partly inspired his ideal of self-determination for people of other countries.
Steeped in the traditions of Jeffersonian democracy, he shared Jeffersons faith in the massesif they were properly informed.
Son of a Presbyterian minister, Wilson was reared in an atmosphere of fervent piety.
He later used the presidential pulpit to preach his inspirational political sermons.
A moving orator, Wilson could rise on the wings of spiritual power to soaring eloquence.
Skillfully using a persuasive voice, he relied not on arm-waving but on sincerity and moral appeal.
As a lifelong student of finely chiseled words, he turned out to be a phraseocrat who coined many noble epigrams.
Someone has remarked that he was born halfway between the Bible and the dictionary and never strayed far from either.
A profound student of government, Wilson believed that the chief executive should play a dynamic role.
He was convinced that Congress could not function properly unless the president, like a kind of prime minister, got out in front and provided leadership.
He enjoyed dramatic success, both as governor and as president, in appealing over the heads of legislators to the sovereign people.
Splendid though Wilsons intellectual equipment was, he suffered from serious defects of personality.
Though jovial and witty in private, he could be cold and standoffish in public.
Incapable of unbending and acting the showman, like Teddy Roosevelt, he lacked the common touch.
He loved humanity in the mass rather than the individual in person.
His academic background caused him to feel most at home with scholars, although he had to work with politicians.
An austere and somewhat arrogant intellectual, he looked down his nose through pince-nez glasses upon lesser minds, including journalists.
He was especially intolerant of stupid senators, whose bungalow minds made him sick.
Wilsons burning idealismespecially his desire to reform ever-present wickednessdrove him forward faster than lesser spirits were willing to go.
His sense of moral righteousness was such that he often found compromise difficult; black was black, wrong was wrong, and one should never compromise with wrong.
President Wilsons Scottish Presbyterian ancestors had passed on to him an inflexible stubbornness.
When convinced that he was right, the principled Wilson would break before he would bend, unlike the pragmatic Roosevelt.
C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 WASH.
7 ORE.
5 CALIF.
11 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
3 S.D.
5 KANSAS 10 OKLA.
10 MICH.
15 N.Y.
45 N.D.
5 MINN.
12 IOWA 13 NEBR.
8 MO.
18 ARK.
9 LA.
10 TEXAS 20 N.M.
3 MISS.
10 ALA.
12 GA.
14 FLA.
6 TENN.
12 N.C.
12 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 PA.
38 OHIO 24 IND.
15 ILL.
29 WISC.
13 KY.
13 ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
18 R.I.
5 CONN.
7 N.J.
14 DEL.
3 MD.
8 (+2 Dem.
) WilsonDemocratic RooseveltProgressive TaftRepublican Presidential Election of 1912 (with electoral vote by state) The Republican split surely boosted Wilson to victory, as he failed to win a clear majority in any state outside the old Confederacy.
The election gave the Democrats solid control  of the White House and both  houses of Congress for the  first time since the Civil War.
Few presidents have arrived at the White House with a clearer program than Wilsons or one destined to be so completely achieved.
The new president called for an all-out assault on what he called the triple wall of privilege: the tariff, the banks, and the trusts.
He tackled the tariff first, summoning Congress into special session in early 1913.
In a precedentshattering move, he did not send his presidential message over to the Capitol to be read loudly by a bored clerk, as had been the custom since Jeffersons day.
Instead he appeared in person before a joint session of Congress and presented his appeal with stunning eloquence and effectiveness.
Moved by Wilsons aggressive leadership, the House swiftly passed the Underwood Tariff Bill, which provided for a substantial reduction of rates.
When a swarm of lobbyists descended on the Senate seeking to disembowel the bill, Wilson promptly issued a combative message to the people, urging them to hold their elected representatives in line.
The tactic worked.
The force of public opinion, aroused by the presidents oratory, secured late in 1913 final approval of the bill Wilson wanted.
The new Underwood Tariff substantially reduced import fees.
It also was a landmark in tax legislation.
Under authority granted by the recently ratified Sixteenth Amendment, Congress enacted a graduated income tax, beginning with a modest levy on incomes over $3,000 (then considerably higher than the average familys income).
By 1917 revenue from the income tax shot ahead of receipts from the tariff.
This gap has since been vastly widened.
A second bastion of the triple wall of privilege was the antiquated and inadequate banking and currency system, long since outgrown by the Republics lusty economic expansion.
The countrys financial structure, still creaking along under the Civil War National Banking Act, revealed glaring defects.
Its most serious shortcoming, as exposed by the panic of 1907, was the inelasticity of the currency.
Banking reserves were heavily concentrated in New York and a handful of other large cities and could not be mobilized in times of financial stress into areas that were badly pinched.
In 1908 Congress had authorized an investigation headed by a mossback banker, Republican senator Aldrich.
Three years later Aldrichs special commission recommended a gigantic bank with numerous branchesin effect, a third Bank of the United States.
For their part, Democratic banking reformers heeded the findings of a House committee chaired by Congressman Arsene Pujo, which traced the tentacles of the money monster into the hidden vaults of American banking and business.
President Wilsons confidant, progressive-minded Massachusetts attorney Louis D. Brandeis, further fanned the flames of reform with his incendiary though scholarly book  In June 1913, in a second dramatic personal appearance before both houses of Congress, the president delivered a stirring plea for sweeping reform of the banking system.
He ringingly endorsed Democratic proposals for a decentralized bank in government hands, as opposed to Republican demands for a huge private bank with fifteen branches.
Again appealing to the sovereign people, Wilson scored another triumph.
In 1913 he signed the epochal Federal Reserve Act, the most important piece of economic legislation between the Civil War and the New Deal.
The new Federal Reserve Board, appointed by the president, oversaw a nationwide system of twelve regional reserve districts, each with its own central bank.
Although these regional banks were actually bankers banks, owned by member financial institutions, the final authority of the  Federal Reserve Board guaranteed a substantial measure of public control.
The board was also empowered to issue paper moneyFederal Reserve Notes backed by commercial paper, such as promissory notes of businesspeople.
Thus the amount of money in circulation could be swiftly increased as needed for the legitimate requirements of business.
The Federal Reserve Act was a red-letter achievement.
It carried the nation with flying banners through the financial crises of the First World War of 19141918.
Without it, the Republics progress toward the modern economic age would have been seriously retarded.
Without pausing for breath, Wilson pushed toward the last remaining rampart in the triple wall of  privilegethe trusts.
Early in 1914 he again went before Congress in a personal appearance that still carried drama.
Nine months and thousands of words later, Congress responded with the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914.
The new law empowered a presidentially appointed commission to turn a searchlight on industries engaged in interstate commerce, such as the meatpackers.
The commissioners were expected to crush monopoly at the source by rooting out unfair trade practices, including unlawful competition, false advertising, mislabeling, adulteration, and bribery.
The knot of monopoly was further cut by the Clayton Anti-Trust Act of 1914.
It lengthened the shopworn Sherman Acts list of business practices that were deemed objectionable, including price discrimination and interlocking directorates (whereby the same individuals served as directors of supposedly competing firms).
The Clayton Act also conferred long-overdue benefits on labor.
Conservative courts had unexpectedly been ruling that trade unions fell under the antimonopoly restraints of the Sherman Act.
A classic case involved striking hatmakers in Danbury, Connecticut, who were assessed triple damages of more than $250,000, which resulted in the loss of their savings and homes.
The Clayton Act therefore sought to exempt labor and agricultural organizations from antitrust prosecution, while explicitly legalizing strikes and peaceful picketing.
Union leader Samuel Gompers hailed the act as the Magna Carta of labor because it legally lifted human labor out of the category of a commodity or article of commerce.
But the rejoicing was premature, as conservative judges in later years continued to clip the wings of the union movement.
C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 CORP.
A CORP.
B CORP.
C CORP.
D CORP.
E CORP.
F CORP.
G CORP.
H CORP.
I HOLDING COMPANY A HOLDING COMPANY B HOLDING COMPANY C HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK   HOLDS MORE THAN 50% OF VOTING STOCK   Organization of Holding Companies Keep in mind that the voting stock of a corporation is often only a fraction of the total stock.
Energetically scaling the triple wall of privilege, Woodrow Wilson had treated the nation to a dazzling demonstration of vigorous presidential leadership.
He proved nearly irresistible in his first eighteen months in office.
For once, a political creed was matched by deed, as the progressive reformers racked up victory after victory.
Standing at the peak of his powers at the head of the progressive forces, Wilson pressed ahead with further reforms.
The Federal Farm Loan Act of 1916 made credit available to farmers at low rates of interestas long demanded by the Populists.
The Warehouse Act of 1916 authorized loans on the security of staple cropsanother Populist idea.
Other laws benefited rural America by providing for highway construction and the establishment of agricultural extension work in the state colleges.
Sweaty laborers also made gains as the progressive wave foamed forward.
Sailors, treated brutally from cat-o-nine-tails days onward, were given relief by the La Follette Seamens Act of 1915.
It required decent treatment and a living wage on American merchant ships.
One unhappy result of this wellintentioned law was the crippling of Americas merchant marine, as freight rates spiraled upward with the crews wages.
Wilson further helped the workers with the Workingmens Compensation Act of 1916, granting assistance to federal civil-service employees during periods of disability.
In the same year, the president approved an act restricting child labor on products flowing into interstate commerce, though the standpat Supreme Court soon invalidated the law.
Railroad workers, numbering about 1.7 million, were not sidetracked.
The Adamson Act of 1916 established an eight-hour day for all employees on trains in interstate commerce, with extra pay for overtime.
Wilson earned the enmity of businesspeople and bigots but endeared himself to progressives when in 1916 he nominated for the Supreme Court the prominent reformer Louis D. Brandeisthe first Jew to be called to the high bench.
Yet even Wilsons progressivism had its limits, and it clearly stopped short of better treatment for blacks.
The southern-bred Wilson actually presided over accelerated segregation in the federal bureaucracy.
When a delegation of black leaders personally protested to him, the schoolmasterish president virtually froze them out of his office.
Despite these limitations, Wilson knew that to be reelected in 1916, he needed to identify himself clearly as the candidate of progressivism.
He appeased businesspeople by making conservative appointments to the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Trade Commission, but he devoted most of his energies to cultivating progressive support.
Wilsons election in 1912 had been something of a fluke, owing largely to the Taft-Roosevelt split in the Republican ranks.
To remain in the White House, the president would have to woo the bull moose voters into the Democratic fold.
In one important area, Wilson chose not to answer the trumpet call of the bull moosers.
In contrast to Roosevelt and even Taft, Wilson recoiled from an aggressive foreign policy.
Hating imperialism, he was repelled by TRs big stickism.
Suspicious of Wall Street, he detested the so-called dollar diplomacy of Taft.
In office only a week, Wilson declared war on dollar diplomacy.
He proclaimed that the government would no longer offer special support to American investors in Latin America and China.
Shivering from this Wilsonian bucket of cold water, American bankers pulled out of the Taft-engineered six-nation loan to China the next day.
In a similarly self-denying vein, Wilson persuaded Congress in early 1914 to repeal the Panama Canal Tolls Act of 1912, which had exempted American coastwise shipping from tolls and thereby provoked sharp protests from injured Britain.
The president further chimed in with the anti-imperial song of Bryan and other Democrats when he signed the Jones Act in 1916.
It granted to the Philippines the boon of territorial status and promised independence as soon as a stable government could be established.
That glad day came thirty years later, on July 4, 1946.
Wilson also partially defused a menacing crisis with Japan in 1913.
The California legislature, still seeking to rid the Golden State of Japanese settlers, prohibited them from owning land.
Tokyo, understandably irritated, lodged vigorous protests.
At Fortress Corregidor, in the Philippines, American gunners were put on around-the-clock alert.
But when Wilson dispatched Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan to plead with the California legislature to soften its stand, tensions eased somewhat.
Political turmoil in Haiti soon forced Wilson to eat some of his anti-imperialist words.
The climax of the disorders came in 19141915, when an outraged populace literally tore to pieces the brutal Haitian president.
In 1915 Wilson reluctantly dispatched marines to protect American lives and property.
In 1916 he stole a page from Roosevelts corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and concluded a treaty with Haiti providing for U.S.
supervision of finances and the police.
In the same year, he sent the leathernecked marines to quell riots in the Dominican Republic, and that debt-cursed land came under the shadow of the American eagles wings for the next eight years.
In 1917 Wilson purchased from Denmark the Virgin Islands, in the West Indies, tightening the grip of Uncle Sam in these sharkinfested waters.
Increasingly, the Caribbean Sea, with its vital approaches to the now navigable Panama Canal, was taking on the earmarks of a Yankee preserve.
Rifle bullets whining across the southern border served as a constant reminder that all was not quiet in Mexico.
For decades Mexico had been sorely C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 exploited by foreign investors in oil, railroads, and mines.
By 1913 American capitalists had sunk about a billion dollars into the underdeveloped but generously endowed country.
But if Mexico was rich, the Mexicans were poor.
Fed up with their miserable lot, they at last revolted.
Their revolution took an ugly turn in 1913, when a conscienceless clique murdered the popular new revolutionary president and installed General Victoriano Huerta, an Indian, in the presidents chair.
All this chaos accelerated a massive migration of Mexicans to the United States.
More than a million Spanish-speaking newcomers tramped across the southern border in the first three decades of the twentieth century.
Settling mostly in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California, they swung picks building highways and railroads or followed the fruit harvests as pickers.
Though often segregated in Spanish-speaking enclaves, they helped to create a unique borderland culture that blended Mexican and American folkways.
The revolutionary bloodshed also menaced American lives and property in Mexico.
Cries for intervention burst from the lips of American jingoes.
Prominent among those chanting for war was the influential chain-newspaper publisher William Randolph Hearst, whose views presumably were colored by his ownership of a Mexican ranch larger than Rhode Island.
Yet President Wilson stood firm against demands to step in.
It was perilous, he declared, to determine foreign policy in the terms of material interest.
But though he refused to intervene, Wilson also refused to recognize officially the murderous government of that brute Huerta, even though most foreign powers acknowledged Huertas bloodyhanded regime.
I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men, the former professor declared.
He put his munitions where his mouth was in 1914, when he allowed American arms to flow to Huertas principal rivals, white-bearded It is characterized by weakness, uncertainty, vacillation, and uncontrollable desire to intermeddle in Mexican affairs.
He has not had the courage to go into Mexico nor the courage to stay out.
I would either go into Mexico and pacify the country or I would keep my hands entirely out of Mexico.
If we are too proud to fight, we should be too proud to quarrel.
I would not choose between murderers.
The United States in the Caribbean This map explains why many Latin Americans accused the United States  of turning the Caribbean Sea into a Yankee lake.
It also suggests that Uncle Sam was much less isolationist in his own backyard than he was in faraway Europe or Asia.
MEXICO GUATEMALA EL SALVADOR HONDURAS BRITISH HONDURAS NICARAGUA COSTA RICA PANAMA COLOMBIA VENEZUELA CUBA HAITI DOMINICAN REPUBLIC PUERTO RICO Vera Cruz (U.S.
seizure, 1914) (U.S.
naval base) Guantanamo (U.S., 1898) VIRGIN IS.
(U.S., 1917) (U.S.
troops, 18981902, 19061909, 19171922) (U.S.
troops, 19091910, 19121925, 19261933) (Financial supervision, 19111924) (U.S acquires Canal Zone, 1903) (Canal option, 1914) (U.S.
troops,  19141934) (Financial supervision, 19161941) (U.S.
troops,  19161924) (Financial supervision, 19051941) (U.S.
troops, 19241925) United States possession United States protectorate or quasi-protectorate Venustiano Carranza and the firebrand Francisco (Pancho) Villa.
The Mexican volcano erupted at the Atlantic seaport of Tampico in April 1914, when a small party of American sailors was arrested.
The Mexicans promptly released the captives and apologized, but they refused the affronted American admirals demand for a salute of twenty-one guns.
Wilson, heavy-hearted but stubbornly determined to eliminate Huerta, asked Congress for authority to use force against Mexico.
Before Congress could act, Wilson ordered the navy to seize the Mexican port of Vera Cruz.
Huerta as well as Carranza hotly protested against this high-handed Yankee maneuver.
Just as a full-dress shooting conflict seemed inevitable, Wilson was rescued by an offer of mediation from the ABC PowersArgentina, Brazil, and Chile.
Huerta collapsed in July 1914 under pressure from within and without.
He was succeeded by his archrival, Venustiano Carranza, still fiercely resentful of Wilsons military meddling.
The whole sorry episode did not augur well for the future of United StatesMexican relations.
Pancho Villa, a combination of bandit and Robin Hood, had meanwhile stolen the spotlight.
He emerged as the chief rival to President Carranza, whom Wilson now reluctantly supported.
Challenging Carranzas authority while also punishing the gringos, Villas men ruthlessly hauled sixteen young American mining engineers off a train traveling through northern Mexico in January 1916 and killed them.
A month later Villa and his followers, hoping to provoke a war between Wilson and Carranza, blazed across the border into Columbus, New Mexico, and murdered another nineteen Americans.
General John J.
(Black Jack*) Pershing, a grimfaced and ramrod-erect veteran of the Cuban and Philippine campaigns, was ordered to break up the bandit band.
His hastily organized force of several thousand mounted troops penetrated deep into rugged Mexico with surprising speed.
They clashed with Carranzas forces and mauled the Villistas but missed capturing Villa himself.
As the threat of war with Germany loomed larger, the invading army was withdrawn in January 1917.
Europes powder magazine, long smoldering, blew up in the summer of 1914, when the flaming pistol of a Serb patriot killed the heir to the throne of  Austria-Hungary in Sarajevo.
An outraged Vienna government, backed by Germany, forthwith presented a stern ultimatum to neighboring Serbia.
An explosive chain reaction followed.
Tiny Serbia, backed by its powerful Slav neighbor Russia, refused to bend the knee sufficiently.
The Russian tsar began to mobilize his ponderous war machine, menacing Germany on the east, even as his ally, C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 *So called from his earlier service as an officer with the crack black Tenth Cavalry.
France, confronted Germany on the west.
In alarm, the Germans struck suddenly at France through unoffending Belgium; their objective was to knock their ancient enemy out of action so that they would have two free hands to repel Russia.
Great Britain, its coastline jeopardized by the assault on Belgium, was sucked into the conflagration on the side of France.
Almost overnight most of Europe was locked in a fight to the death.
On one side were arrayed the Central Powers: Germany and Austria-Hungary, and later Turkey and Bulgaria.
On the other side were the Allies: principally France, Britain, and Russia, and later Japan and Italy.
Americans thanked God for the ocean moats and self-righteously congratulated themselves on having had ancestors wise enough to have abandoned the hell pits of Europe.
America felt strong, snug, smug, and securebut not for long.
President Wilsons grief at the outbreak of war was compounded by the recent death of his wife.
He sorrowfully issued the routine neutrality proclamation and called on Americans to be neutral in thought as well as deed.
But such scrupulous evenhandedness proved difficult.
Both sides wooed the United States, the great neutral in the West.
The British enjoyed the boon of close cultural, linguistic, and economic ties with America and had the added advantage of controlling most of the transatlantic cables.
Their censors sheared away war stories harmful to the Allies and drenched the United States with tales of German bestiality.
The Germans and the Austro-Hungarians counted on the natural sympathies of their transplanted countrymen in America.
Including persons with at least one foreign-born parent, people with blood ties to the Central Powers numbered some 11 million in 1914.
Some of these recent immigrants expressed noisy sympathy for the fatherland, but most were simply grateful to be so distant from the fray.
Most Americans were anti-German from the outset.
With his villainous upturned mustache, Kaiser Wilhelm II seemed the embodiment of arrogant autocracy, an impression strengthened by Germanys ruthless strike at neutral Belgium.
German and Austrian agents further tarnished the image of the Central Powers in American eyes when they resorted to violence in American factories and ports.
When a German operative in 1915 absentmindedly left his briefcase on a New York elevated car, its documents detailing plans for industrial sabotage were quickly discovered and publicized.
American opinion, already ill disposed, was further inflamed against the kaiser and Germany.
Yet the great majority of Americans earnestly hoped to stay out of the horrible war.
When Europe burst into flames in 1914, the United States was bogged down in a worrisome business recession.
But as fate would have it, British and French war orders soon pulled American industry out of the morass of hard times and onto a peak of war-born prosperity.
Part of this boom was financed by American bankers, notably the Wall Street firm  of J.P.
Morgan and Company, which eventually advanced to the Allies the enormous sum of $2.3 billion during the period of American neutrality.
The Central Powers protested bitterly against the immense trade between America and the Allies, but this traffic did not in fact violate the international neutrality laws.
Germany was technically free to C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 Central Germany 2,501,181 3,911,847 1,869,590 8,282,618 Powers Austria-Hungary 1,670,524 900,129 131,133 2,701,786 Great Britain 1,219,968 852,610 1,158,474 3,231,052 Allied (Ireland)* 1,352,155 2,141,577 1,010,628 4,504,360 Powers Russia 1,732,421 949,316 70,938 2,752,675 Italy 1,343,070 695,187 60,103 2,098,360 TOTAL (for all foreign  countries, including  those not listed) 13,345,545 12,916,311 5,981,526 32,243,282 Percentage of total  U.S.
population 14.5 14.0 6.5 35.0 *Ireland was not yet independent.
{ { trade with the United States.
It was prevented from doing so not by American policy but by geography and the British navy.
Trade between Germany and America had to move across the Atlantic; but the British controlled the sea-lanes, and they threw a noose-tight blockade of mines and ships across the North Sea, gateway to German ports.
Over the unavailing protests of American shippers, farmers, and manufacturers, the British began forcing American vessels off the high seas and into their ports.
This harassment of American shipping proved highly effective, as trade between Germany and the United States virtually ceased.
Hard-pressed Germany did not tamely consent to being starved out.
In retaliation for the British blockade, in February 1915 Berlin announced a submarine war area around the British Isles.
The submarine was a weapon so new that existing international law could not be made to fit it.
The old rule that a warship must stop and board a merchantman could hardly apply to submarines, which could easily be rammed or sunk if they surfaced.
The cigar-shaped marauders posed a dire threat to the United Statesso long as Wilson insisted on maintaining Americas neutral rights.
Berlin officials declared that they would try not to sink  shipping, but they warned that mistakes would probably occur.
Wilson now determined on a policy of calculated risk.
He would continue to claim profitable neutral trading rights, while hoping that no high-seas incident would force his hand to grasp the sword of war.
Setting his peninsular jaw, he emphatically warned Germany that it would be held to strict accountability for any attacks on American vessels or citizens.
The German submarines (known as U-boats, from the German  meanwhile began their deadly work.
In the first months of 1915, they sank about ninety ships in the war zone.
Then the submarine issue became acute when the British passenger liner  doed and sank off the coast of Ireland on May 7, 1915, with the loss of 1,198 lives, including 128 Americans.
The   cases of small-arms ammunition, a fact the Germans used to justify the sinking.
But Americans were swept by a wave of shock and anger at this act of mass murder and piracy.
The eastern United States, closer to the war, seethed with talk of fighting, but the rest of the country showed a strong distaste for hostilities.
The peace-loving Wilson had no stomach for leading a disunited nation into war.
He well remembered the mistake in 1812 of his fellow Princetonian, James Madison.
Instead, by a series of increasingly strong notes, Wilson attempted to bring the German warlords sharply to book.
Even this measured approach was too much for Secretary of State Bryan, who resigned rather than sign a protestation that might spell shooting.
But Wilson resolutely stood his ground.
There is such a thing, Britain $594,271,863 $911,794,954 $1,526,685,102 257% France 159,818,924 369,397,170 628,851,988 393 Italy* 74,235,012 184,819,688 269,246,105 363 Germany 344,794,276 28,863,354 288,899 0.08 *Italy joined the Allies in April 1915.
We [Americans] prattle about humanity while we manufacture poisoned shrapnel and picric acid for profit.
Ten thousand German widows, ten thousand orphans, ten thousand graves bear the legend Made in America.
he declared, as a man being too proud to fight.
This kind of talk incensed the war-thirsty Theodore Roosevelt.
The Rough Rider assailed the spineless simperers who heeded the weasel words of the pacifistic professor in the White House.
Yet Wilson, sticking to his verbal guns, made some diplomatic progress.
After another British liner, the  loss of two American lives, Berlin reluctantly agreed not to sink unarmed and unresisting passenger ships  This pledge appeared to be violated in March 1916, when the Germans torpedoed a French passenger steamer, the  informed the Germans that unless they renounced the inhuman practice of sinking merchant ships without warning, he would break diplomatic relationsan almost certain prelude to war.
Germany reluctantly knuckled under to President Wilsons  passenger ships and merchant vessels without giving warning.
But the Germans attached a long string to their  to persuade the Allies to modify what Berlin regarded as their illegal blockade.
This, obviously, was something that Washington could not do.
Wilson promptly accepted the German pledge, without accepting the string.
He thus won a temporary but precarious diplomatic victoryprecarious because Germany could pull the string whenever it chose, and the president might suddenly find himself tugged over the cliff of war.
Against this ominous backdrop, the presidential campaign of 1916 gathered speed.
Both the bull moose Progressives and the Republicans met in Chicago.
The Progressives uproariously renominated Theodore Roosevelt, but the Rough Rider, C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 British Military Area (declared November 3, 1914) and German Submarine War Zone (declared February 4, 1915) who loathed Wilson and all his works, had no stomach for splitting the Republicans again and ensuring the reelection of his hated rival.
In refusing to run, he sounded the death knell of the Progressive party.
Roosevelts Republican admirers also clamored for Teddy, but the Old Guard detested the renegade who had ruptured the party in 1912.
Instead they drafted Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes, a cold intellectual who had achieved a solid liberal record when he was governor of New York.
The Republican platform condemned the Democratic tariff, assaults on the trusts, and Wilsons wishy-washiness in dealing with Mexico and  Germany.
The thick-whiskered Hughes (an animated feather duster) left the bench for the campaign stump, where he was not at home.
In anti-German areas of the country, he assailed Wilson for not standing up to the kaiser, whereas in isolationist areas he took a softer line.
This fence-straddling operation led to the jeer, Charles Evasive Hughes.
Hughes was further plagued by Roosevelt, who was delivering a series of skin-em-alive speeches against that damned Presbyterian hypocrite Wilson.
Frothing for war, TR privately scoffed at Hughes as a whiskered Wilson; the only difference between the two, he said, was a shave.
Wilson, nominated by acclamation at the Democratic convention in St.
Louis, ignored Hughes on the theory that one should not try to murder a man Your telegram received.
I would feel deeply mortified to have you or anybody like you vote for me.
Since you have access to many disloyal Americans and I have not, I will ask you to convey this message to them.
who is committing suicide.
His campaign was built on the slogan, He Kept Us Out of War.
Democratic orators warned that by electing Charles Evans Hughes, the nation would be electing a fightwith a certain frustrated Rough Rider leading the charge.
A Democratic advertisement appealing to the American workingpeople read, On election day Hughes swept the East and looked like a surefire winner.
Wilson went to bed that night prepared to accept defeat, while the New York newspapers displayed huge portraits of The President-ElectCharles Evans Hughes.
But the rest of the country turned the tide.
Midwesterners and westerners, attracted by Wilsons progressive reforms and antiwar policies, flocked to the polls for the president.
The final result, in doubt for several days, hinged on California, which Wilson carried by some 3,800 votes out of about a million cast.
Wilson barely squeaked through, with a final vote of 277 to 254 in the Electoral College, and 9,127,695 to 8,533,507 in the popular column.
The pro-labor Wilson received strong support from the working class and from renegade bull moosers, whom Republicans failed to lure back into their camp.
Wilson had not specifically promised to keep the country out of war, but probably enough voters relied on such implicit assurances to ensure his victory.
Their hopeful expectations were soon rudely shattered.
C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 WASH.
7 ORE.
5 CALIF.
13 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
3 S.D.
5 KANSAS 10 OKLA.
10 MICH.
15 N.Y.
45 N.D.
5 MINN.
12 IOWA 13 NEBR.
8 MO.
18 ARK.
9 LA.
10 TEXAS 20 N.M.
3 MISS.
10 ALA.
12 GA.
14 FLA.
6 TENN.
12 N.C.
12 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W. VA.
7 (+1 Dem.
) PA.
38 OHIO 24 IND.
15 ILL.
29 WISC.
13 KY.
13 ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
18 R.I.
5 CONN.
7 N.J.
14 DEL.
3 MD.
8 WilsonDemocratic HughesRepublican Presidential Election of 1916 (with electoral vote by state) Wilson was so worried about being a lame duck president in a time of great international tensions that he drew up a plan whereby Hughes, if victorious, would be appointed secretary of state, Wilson and the vice president would resign, and Hughes would thus succeed immediately to the presidency.
Wilson defeats Taft and Roosevelt for  presidency Underwood Tariff Act Sixteenth Amendment (income tax) passed Federal Reserve Act Huerta takes power in Mexico Seventeenth Amendment (direct  election of senators) passed Clayton Anti-Trust Act Federal Trade Commission established U.S.
occupation of Vera Cruz, Mexico World War I begins in Europe La Follette Seamens Act U-boat U.S.
Marines sent to Haiti Workingmens Compensation Act Federal Farm Loan Act Warehouse Act Adamson Act Pancho Villa raids New Mexico Brandeis appointed to Supreme Court Jones Act U.S.
Marines sent to Dominican Republic Wilson defeats Hughes for presidency United States buys Virgin Islands from  Denmark C HAPTER 30 Wilsonian Progressivism at Home and Abroad, 19121916 For further reading, see page A21 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  ebate about progressivism has revolved mainly around a question that is simple to ask but devilishly difficult to answer: who were the progressives?
It was once taken for granted that progressive reformers were simply the heirs of the JeffersonianJacksonian-Populist reform crusades; they were the oppressed and downtrodden common folk who finally erupted in wrath and demanded their due.
But in his influential  Richard Hofstadter astutely challenged that view.
Progressive leaders, he argued, were not drawn from the ranks of societys poor and marginalized.
Rather, they were middle-class people threatened from above by the emerging power of new corporate elites and from below by a restless working class.
It was not economic deprivation, but status anxiety, Hofstadter insisted, that prompted these people  to become reformers.
Their psychological motivation, Hofstadter concluded, rendered many of their reform efforts quirky and ineffectual.
By contrast, New Left historians, notably Gabriel Kolko, argue that progressivism was dominated by established business leaders who successfully directed reform to their own conservative ends.
In this view government regulation (as embodied in new agencies like the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Tariff Commission, and in legislation like the Meat Inspection Act) simply accomplished what two generations of private efforts had failed to accomplish: dampening cutthroat competition, stabilizing markets, and making America safe for monopoly capitalism.
Still other scholars, notably Robert H. Wiebe and Samuel P. Hays, argue that the progressives were neither the psychologically or economically disadvantaged nor the old capitalist elite, but  were, rather, members of a rapidly emerging, selfconfident social class possessed of the new techniques of scientific management, technological expertise, and organizational know-how.
This organizational school of historians does not see progressivism as a struggle of the people against the interests, as a confused and nostalgic campaign by status-threatened reformers, or as a conservative coup dtat.
The progressive movement, in this view, was by and large an effort to rationalize and modernize many social institutions, by introducing the wise and impartial hand of government regulation.
This view has much to recommend it.
Yet despite its widespread acceptance among historians, it is an explanation that cannot adequately account for the titanic political struggles of the progressive era over the very reforms that the organizational school regards as simple adjustments to modernity.
The organizational approach also brushes over the deep philosophical differences that divided progressives themselvessuch as the ideological chasm that separated Roosevelts New Nationalism from Wilsons New Freedom.
Nor can the organizational approach sufficiently explain why, as demonstrated by Otis Graham in  majoritywho survived into the New Deal era criticized that agenda for being too bureaucratic and for laying too heavy a regulatory hand on American society.
Recently scholars such as Robyn Muncy, Linda Gordon, and Theda Skocpol have stressed the role of women in advocating progressive reforms.
Building the American welfare state in the early twentieth century, they argue, was fundamentally a gendered activity inspired by a female dominion of social workers and social feminists.
Moreover, in contrast to many European countries where labor movements sought a welfare state to benefit the working class, American female reformers promoted welfare programs specifically to protect women and children.
The War to End War  19171918 W OODROW W ILSON , W AR M ESSAGE , A PRIL 2, 1917 D estiny dealt cruelly with Woodrow Wilson.
The lover of peace, as fate would have it, was forced to lead a hesitant and peace-loving nation into war.
As the last days of 1916 slipped through the hourglass, the president made one final, futile attempt  to mediate between the embattled belligerents.
On January 22, 1917, he delivered one of his most moving addresses, restating Americas commitment to neutral rights and declaring that only a negotiated peace without victory would prove durable.
Germans warlords responded with a blow of the mailed fist.
On January 31, 1917, they announced to an astonished world their decision to wage  including Americas, in the war zone.
Why this rash act?
War with America was the last thing Germany wanted.
But after three ghastly years in the trenches, Germanys leaders decided the distinction between combatants and noncombatants was a luxury they could no longer afford.
Thus they jerked on the string they had attached to their  land to its knees before the United States entered the war.
Wilson, his bluff called, broke diplomatic relations with Germany but refused to move closer to war unless the Germans undertook overt acts against American lives.
To defend American interests short of war, the president asked Congress for authority to arm American merchant ships.
When a band of midwestern senators launched a filibuster to block the measure,  Wilson denounced them as a little group of willful men who were rendering a great nation helpless and contemptible.
But their obstruction was a powerful reminder of the continuing strength of American isolationism.
Meanwhile, the sensational Zimmermann note was intercepted and published on March 1, 1917, infuriating Americans, especially westerners.
German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann had secretly proposed a German-Mexican alliance, tempting anti-Yankee Mexico with veiled promises of recovering Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.
On the heels of this provocation came the longdreaded overt acts in the Atlantic, where German U-boats sank four unarmed American merchant vessels in the first two weeks of March.
As one Philadelphia newspaper observed, the difference between war and what we have now is that now we arent fighting back.
Simultaneously came the rousing news that a revolution in Russia had toppled the cruel regime of the tsars.
America could now fight foursquare for democracy on the side of the Allies, without the black sheep of Russian despotism in the Allied fold.
Subdued and solemn, Wilson at last stood before a hushed joint session of Congress on the evening of April 2, 1917, and asked for a declaration of war.
He had lost his gamble that America could pursue the profits of neutral trade without being sucked into the ghastly maelstrom.
A myth developed in later years that America was dragged unwittingly into war by munitions makers and Wall Street bankers, desperate to protect their profits and loans.
Yet the weapons merchants and financiers were already thriving, unhampered by wartime government restrictions and heavy taxation.
Their slogan might well have been Neutrality Forever.
The simple truth is that British harassment of American commerce had been galling but endurable; Germany had resorted to the mass killing of civilians.
The difference was like that between a gang of thieves and a gang of murderers.
President Wilson had drawn a clear, if risky, line against the depredations of the submarine.
The German high command, in a last desperate throw of the dice, chose to cross it.
In a figurative sense, Americas war declaration of April 6, 1917, bore the unambiguous trademark Made in Germany.
It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful people into war, Wilson said in his war message.
It was fearful indeed, not least of all because of the formidable challenge it posed to Wilsons leadership skills.
Ironically, it fell to the scholarly Wilson, deeply respectful of American traditions, to shatter one of the most sacred of those traditions by entangling America in a distant European war.
How could the president arouse the American people to shoulder this unprecedented burden?
For more than a century, they had prided themselves on their isolationism from the periodic outbursts of militarized violence that afflicted the Old World.
Since 1914 their pride had been reinforced by the bountiful profits gained through neutrality.
German U-boats had now roughly shoved a wavering America into the abyss, but ominously, no fewer than six senators and fifty representatives (including the first congresswoman, Jeannette Rankin of Montana) had C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 voted against the war resolution.
Wilson could whip up no enthusiasm, especially in the landlocked Midwest, by fighting to make the world safe from the submarine.
To galvanize the country, Wilson would have to proclaim more glorified aims.
Radiating the spiritual fervor of his Presbyterian ancestors, he declared the twin goals of a war to end war and a crusade to make the world safe for democracy.
Brandishing the sword of righteousness, Wilson virtually hypnotized the nation with his lofty ideals.
He contrasted the selfish war aims of the other belligerents, Allied and enemy alike, with Americas shining altruism.
America, he preached, did not fight for the sake of riches or territorial conquest.
The Republic sought only to shape an international order in which democracy could flourish without fear of power-crazed autocrats and militarists.
In Wilsonian idealism the personality of the president and the necessities of history were perfectly matched.
The high-minded Wilson genuinely believed in the principles he so eloquently intoned.
And probably no other appeal could have successfully converted the American people from their  historic hostility to involvement in European squabbles.
Americans, it seemed, could be either isolationists or crusaders, but nothing in between.
Wilsons appeal workedperhaps too well.
Holding aloft the torch of idealism, the president fired up the public mind to a fever pitch.
Force, force to the utmost, force without stint or limit, he cried, while the country responded less elegantly with Hang the kaiser.
Lost on the gale was Wilsons earlier plea for peace without victory.
Wilson quickly came to be recognized as the moral leader of the Allied cause.
He scaled a summit of inspiring oratory on January 8, 1918, when he delivered his famed Fourteen Points Address to an enthusiastic Congress.
Although one of his primary purposes was to keep reeling Russia in the war, Wilsons vision inspired all the drooping Allies to make mightier efforts and demoralized the enemy governments by holding out alluring promises to their dissatisfied minorities.
The first five of the Fourteen Points were broad in scope.
(1) A proposal to abolish secret treaties pleased liberals of all countries.
(2) Freedom of the seas appealed to the Germans, as well as to Americans who distrusted British sea power.
(3) A removal of economic barriers among nations was comforting to Germany, which feared postwar vengeance.
(4) Reduction of armament burdens was gratifying to taxpayers everywhere.
(5) An adjustment of colonial claims in the interests of both native peoples and the colonizers was reassuring to the antiimperialists.
Other points among the fourteen proved to be no less seductive.
They held out the hope of independence (self-determination) to oppressed minority groups, such as the Poles, millions of whom lay under the heel of Germany and AustriaHungary.
The capstone point, number fourteen, foreshadowed the League of Nationsan international organization that Wilson dreamed would provide a system of collective security.
Wilson earnestly prayed that this new scheme would effectively guarantee the political independence and territorial integrity of all countries, whether large or small.
Yet Wilsons appealing points, though raising hopes the world over, were not everywhere applauded.
Certain leaders of the Allied nations, with an eye to territorial booty, were less than enthusiastic.
Hard-nosed Republicans at home grumbled, and some of them openly mocked the fourteen commandments of God Almighty Wilson.
Mobilizing peoples minds for war, both in America and abroad, was an urgent task facing the Washington authorities.
For this purpose the Committee on Public Information was created.
It was headed by a youngish journalist, George Creel, who, though outspoken and tactless, was gifted with zeal and imagination.
His job was to sell America on the war and sell the world on Wilsonian war aims.
The Creel organization, employing some 150,000 workers at home and overseas, proved that words were indeed weapons.
It sent out an army of 75,000 four-minute menoften longer-winded than thatwho delivered countless speeches containing much patriotic pep.
Creels propaganda took varied forms.
Posters were splashed on billboards in the Battle of the Fences, as artists rallied to the colors.
Millions of leaflets and pamphlets, which contained the most pungent Wilsonisms, were showered like confetti upon the world.
Propaganda booklets with redwhite-and-blue covers were printed by the millions.
Hang-the-kaiser movies, carrying such titles as Arm-waving conductors by the thousands led huge audiences in songs that poured scorn on the enemy and glorified the boys in uniform.
The entire nation, catching the frenzied spirit of a religious revival, burst into song.
This was undoubtedly Americas singingest war.
Most memorable was George M. Cohans spine-tingling Over There: Creel typified American war mobilization, which relied more on aroused passion and voluntary compliance than on formal laws.
But he oversold the ideals of Wilson and led the world to expect too much.
When the president proved to be a mortal and not a god, the resulting disillusionment both at home and abroad was disastrous.
German-Americans numbered over 8 million, counting those with at least one parent foreignborn, out of a total population of 100 million.
On the whole they proved to be dependably loyal to the United States.
Yet rumormongers were quick to spread tales of spying and sabotage; even trifling epidemics of diarrhea were blamed on German agents.
A few German-Americans were tarred, feathered, and beaten; in one extreme case a German Socialist in Illinois was lynched by a drunken mob.
As emotion mounted, hysterical hatred of Germans and things Germanic swept the nation.
Orchestras found it unsafe to present Germancomposed music, like that of Wagner or Beethoven.
German books were removed from library shelves, and German classes were canceled in high schools and colleges.
Sauerkraut became liberty cabbage, hamburger liberty steak.
Even beer became suspect, as patriotic Americans fretted over the loyalty of breweries with names like Schlitz and Pabst.
Both the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 reflected current fears about Germans and antiwar Americans.
Especially visible among the 1,900 prosecutions undertaken under these laws were antiwar Socialists and members of the radical Industrial Workers of the World (IWW).
Kingpin Socialist Eugene V. Debs was convicted under the Espionage Act in 1918 and sentenced to ten years in a federal penitentiary.
IWW leader William D.
(Big Bill) Haywood and ninety-nine associates were similarly convicted.
Virtually any criticism of the government could be censored and punished.
Some critics claimed the new laws were bending, if not breaking, the First Amendment.
But in  C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 their legality, arguing that freedom of speech could be revoked when such speech posed a clear and present danger to the nation.
These prosecutions form an ugly chapter in the history of American civil liberty.
With the dawn of peace, presidential pardons were rather freely granted, including President Hardings to Eugene Debs in 1921.
Yet a few victims lingered behind bars into the 1930s.
Victory was no foregone conclusion, especially since the Republic, despite ample warning, was caught flat-footedly unready for its leap into global war.
The pacifistic Wilson had only belatedly backed some mild preparedness measures beginning in 1915, including the creation of a civilian Council of National Defense to study problems of economic mobilization.
He had also launched a shipbuilding program (as much to capture the belligerents wardisrupted foreign trade as to anticipate Americas possible entry into the war)  and endorsed a modest beefing-up of the army, which with 100,000 regulars then ranked about fifteenth among the armies of the world, in the same category with Persias.
It would take a herculean effort to marshal Americas daunting but disorganized resources and throw them into the field quickly enough to bolster the Allied war effort.
Towering obstacles confronted economic mobilizers.
Sheer ignorance was among the biggest roadblocks.
No one knew precisely how much steel or explosive powder the country was capable of producing.
Old ideas also proved to be liabilities, as traditional fears of big government hamstrung efforts to orchestrate the economy from Washington.
States rights Democrats and businesspeople alike balked at federal economic controls, even though the embattled nation could ill afford the freewheeling, hit-or-miss chaos of the peacetime economy.
Late in the war, and after some bruising political battles, Wilson succeeded in imposing some order on this economic confusion.
In March 1918 he appointed lone-eagle stock speculator Bernard Baruch to head the War Industries Board.
But the War Industries Board never had more than feeble formal powers, and it was disbanded within days after the armistice.
Even in a globe-girdling crisis, the American preference for laissez-faire and for a weak central government proved amazingly strong.
Spurred by the slogan, Labor Will Win the War, American workers sweated their way to victory.
In part they were driven by the War Departments work or fight rule of 1918, which threatened any unemployed male with being immediately drafted a powerful discouragement to go on strike.
But for the most part, government tried to treat labor fairly.
The National War Labor Board, chaired by former president Taft, exerted itself to head off labor disputes that might hamper the war effort.
While pressing employers to grant concessions to labor, including high wages and the eight-hour day, the board stopped short of supporting labors most important demand: a government guarantee of the right to organize into unions.
Fortunately for the Allied cause, Samuel Gompers and his American Federation of Labor (AF of L) loyally supported the war, though some smaller and more radical labor organizations, including the Industrial Workers of the World, did not.
The IWW, known as the Wobblies and sometimes derided as the I Wont Works, engineered some of the most damaging industrial sabotage, and not without reason.
As transient laborers in such industries as fruit and lumber, the Wobblies were victims of some of the shabbiest working conditions in the country.
When they protested, many were viciously beaten, arrested, or run out of town.
Mainstream labors loyalty was rewarded.
At wars end, the AF of L had more than doubled its membership, to over 3 million, and in the most heavily unionized sectorscoal mining, manufacturing, and transportationreal wages (after adjusting for inflation) had risen more than 20  percent over prewar levels.
A new day seemed to be dawning for the long-struggling union movement.
Yet labor harbored grievances.
Recognition of the right to organize still eluded labors grasp.
Wartime inflation threatened to eclipse wage gains (prices more than doubled between 1914 and 1920).
Not even the call of patriotism and Wilsonian idealism could defuse all labor disputes.
Some six thousand strikes, several stained by blood, broke C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 out in the war years.
In 1919 the greatest strike in American history rocked the steel industry.
More than a quarter of a million steelworkers walked off their jobs in a bid to force their employers to recognize their right to organize and bargain collectively.
The steel companies resisted mercilessly.
They refused to negotiate with union representatives  and  brought in thirty thousand African-American strikebreakers to keep the mills running.
After bitter confrontations that left more than a dozen workers dead, the steel strike collapsed, a grievous setback that crippled the union movement for more than a decade.
The black workers who entered the steel mills in 1919 were but a fraction of the tens of thousands of southern blacks drawn to the North in wartime by the magnet of war-industry employment.
These migrants made up the small-scale beginnings of a great northward African-American trek that would eventually grow to massive proportions.
Their  sudden appearance in previously all-white areas sometimes sparked interracial violence.
An explosive riot in East St.
Louis, Missouri, in July 1917 left nine whites and at least forty blacks dead.
An equally gruesome race riot ripped through Chicago.
The wartime Windy City was taut with racial tension as a growing black population expanded into white working-class neighborhoods and as AfricanAmericans found jobs as strikebreakers in meatpacking plants.
Triggered by an incident at a bathing beach in July 1919, a reign of terror descended on the city for nearly two weeks.
Black and white gangs roamed Chicagos streets, eventually killing fifteen whites and twenty-three blacks.
Women also heeded the call of patriotism and opportunity.
Thousands of female workers flooded into factories and fields, taking up jobs vacated by men who left the assembly line for the frontline.
But the war split the womens movement deeply.
Many progressive-era feminists were pacifists, inclined to oppose the participation both of America in the war and women in the war effort.
This group found a voice in the National Womans party, led by Quaker activist Alice Paul, which demonstrated against Kaiser Wilson with marches and hunger strikes.
How can our nation escape the logic it  has never failed to follow, when its last unenfranchised class calls for the vote?
Behold our Uncle Sam floating the banner with one hand, Taxation without representation is tyranny, and with the other seizing the billions of dollars paid in taxes by women to whom he refuses representation.
Is there a single man who can justify such inequality of treatment, such outrageous discrimination?
Not one.
But the larger part of the suffrage movement, represented by the National American Woman Suffrage Association, supported Wilsons war.
Leaders echoed Wilsons justification for fighting by arguing that women must take part in the war effort to earn a role in shaping the peace.
The fight for democracy abroad was womens best hope for winning true democracy at home.
War mobilization gave new momentum to the suffrage fight.
Impressed by womens war work, President Wilson endorsed woman suffrage as a vitally necessary war measure.
In 1917 New York voted for suffrage at the state level; Michigan, Oklahoma, and South Dakota followed.
Eventually the groundswell could no longer be contained.
In 1920, eighty years after the first calls for suffrage at Seneca Falls, the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified, giving all American women the right to vote.
(See the Appendix.
) Despite political victory, womens wartime economic gains proved fleeting.
Although a permanent Womens Bureau did emerge after the war in the Department of Labor to protect women in the workplace, most women workers soon gave up their war jobs.
Meanwhile, Congress affirmed its support for women in their traditional role as mothers when it passed the Sheppard-Towner Maternity Act of 1921, providing federally financed instruction in maternal and infant health care.
Feminists continued to flex their political muscle in the postwar decade, especially in campaigns C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 for laws to protect women in the workplace and prohibit child labor.
Complete success often eluded them in those crusades, but the developments of the World War I era nevertheless foreshadowed a future when womens wage-labor and political power would reshape the American way of life.
Mobilization relied more on the heated emotions of patriotism than on the cool majesty of the laws.
The largely voluntary and somewhat haphazard character of economic war organization testified unequivocally to ocean-insulated Americas safe distance from the fightingas well as to the still-modest scale of government powers in the progressive-era Republic.
As the larder of democracy, America had to feed itself and its allies.
By a happy inspiration, the man chosen to head the Food Administration was the Quaker-humanitarian Herbert C. Hoover.
He was already considered a hero because he had successfully led a massive charitable drive to feed the starving people of war-racked Belgium.
In common with other American war administrators, Hoover preferred to rely on voluntary compliance rather than on compulsory edicts.
He deliberately rejected issuing ration cards, a practice used in Europe.
Instead he waged a whirlwind propaganda campaign through posters, billboards, newspapers, pulpits, and movies.
To save food for export, Hoover proclaimed wheatless Wednesdays and meatless Tuesdaysall on a voluntary basis.
Even children, when eating apples, were urged to be patriotic to the core.
The country soon broke out in a rash of vegetable victory gardens, as perspiring patriots hoed their way to victory in backyards and vacant lots.
Congress severely restricted the use of foodstuffs for manufacturing alcoholic beverages, and the warspawned spirit of self-denial helped accelerate the wave of prohibition that was sweeping the country.
Many leading brewers were German-descended, and this taint made the drive against alcohol all the more popular.
The reformers dream of a saloonless nation was finally achievedtemporarilyin 1919 with the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment, prohibiting all alcoholic drinks.
Thanks to the fervent patriotic wartime spirit, Hoovers voluntary approach worked.
Farm production increased by one-fourth, and food exports to the Allies tripled in volume.
Hoovers methods  were widely imitated in other war agencies.
The Fuel Administration exhorted Americans to save fuel with heatless Mondays, lightless nights, and gasless Sundays.
The Treasury Department sponsored huge parades and invoked slogans like Halt the Hun to promote four great Liberty Loan drives, followed by a Victory Loan campaign in 1919.
Together these efforts netted the then-fantastic sum of about $21 billion, or two-thirds of the current cost of the war to the United States.
The remainder was raised by increased taxes, which, unlike the loan subscriptions, were obligatory.
(The ultimate bill, including interest and veterans benefits, mounted to some $112 billion.
) Pressures of various kinds, patriotic and otherwise, were used to sell bonds.
The unfortunate German-American who could not display a Liberty Bond button might find his or her house bedaubed with yellow paint.
A number of reluctant investors in war bonds were roughly handled.
In at least one instance, a man signed for a bond with a rope around his neck.
Despite the Wilson administrations preference for voluntary means of mobilizing the economy, the government on occasion reluctantly exercised its sovereign formal power, notably when it took over the nations railroads following indescribable traffic snarls in late 1917.
Washington also hustled to get its hands on ships.
It seized enemy merchant vessels trapped in Americas harbors and orchestrated a gigantic drive to construct new tonnage.
A few concrete vessels were launched, including one appropriately named  undertaken, though after months of war, birds were still nesting in the trees from which the vessels were to be hammered.
Most citizens, at the outset, did not dream of sending a mighty force to France.
As far as fighting went, America would use its navy to uphold freedom of the seas.
It would continue to ship war materials to the Allies and supply them with loans, which finally totaled nearly $10 billion.
But in April and May of 1917, the European associates laid their cards on  the table.
They confessed that they were scraping the bottom not only of their money chests but,  more ominously, of their manpower barrels.
A huge American army would have to be raised, trained, and transported, or the whole western front would collapse.
Conscription was the only answer to the need for raising an immense army with all possible speed.
Wilson disliked a draft, as did many other Americans with Civil War memories, but he eventually accepted and eloquently supported conscription as a disagreeable and temporary necessity.
The proposed draft bill immediately ran into a barrage of criticism in Congress.
A congressman from Missouri, deploring compulsion, cried out in protest that there was precious little difference between a conscript and a convict.
Prophets of doom predicted that on draft-registration day, the streets would run red with blood.
At length Congresssix weeks after declaring wargrudgingly got around to passing conscription.
C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 We had spent our boyhood in the afterglow of the peaceful nineteenth century.
What was war like?
We wanted to see with our own eyes.
We flocked into the volunteer services.
I respected the conscientious objectors, and occasionally felt I should take that course myself, but hell, I wanted to see the show.
The draft act required the registration of all males between the ages of eighteen and forty-five.
No draft dodger could purchase his exemption or hire a substitute, as in the days of the Civil War, though the law exempted men in key industries, such as shipbuilding.
The draft machinery, on the whole, worked effectively.
Registration day proved to be a day of patriotic pilgrimages to flag-draped registration centers, and the sign-up saw no shedding of blood, as some had gloomily predicted.
Despite precautions, some 337,000 slackers escaped the draft, and about 4,000 conscientious objectors were excused.
Within a few frantic months, the army grew to over 4 million men.
For the first time, women were admitted to the armed forces; some 11,000 to the navy and 269 to the marines.
African-Americans also served in the armed forces, though in strictly segregated units and usually under white officers.
Reflecting racial attitudes of the time, military authorities hesitated to train black men for combat, and the majority of black soldiers were assigned to construction battalions or put to work unloading ships.
Recruits were supposed to receive six months of training in America and two more months overseas.
But so great was the urgency that many doughboys were swept swiftly into battle scarcely knowing how to handle a rifle, much less a bayonet.
Russias collapse underscored the need for haste.
The communistic Bolsheviks, after seizing power late in 1917, ultimately withdrew their beaten country from the capitalistic war early in 1918.
This sudden defection released hundreds of thousands of battle-tested Germans from the eastern front facing Russia for the western front in France, where, for the first time in the war, they were developing a dangerous superiority in manpower.
Berlins calculations as to American tardiness were surprisingly accurate.
Germany had counted on knocking out Britain six months after the declaration of unlimited submarine warfare, long before America could get into the struggle.
No really effective American fighting force reached France until about a year Coblentz Cologne Metz Paris Brussels Ypres Antwerp Sedan (Meuse-Argonne Offensive) Verdun Soissons B E L G I U M F R A N C E LUX.
G E R M A N Y SWITZERLAND NETH.
German line, spring 1918 Line of farthest German advance Points at which United States forces helped to check or push back German advances Areas over which American troops advanced Armistice line Major U.S.
Operations in France, 1918 One doughboy recorded in his diary his baptism of fire at St.
Mihiel: Hiked through dark woods.
No lights allowed, guided by holding on the pack of the man ahead.
Stumbled through underbrush for about half mile into an open field where we waited in soaking rain until about 10:00  P .
We then started on our hike to the St.
Mihiel front, arriving on the crest of a hill at 1:00  A .
I saw a sight which I shall never forget.
It was the zero hour and in one instant the entire front as far as the eye could reach in either direction was a sheet of flame, while the heavy artillery made the earth quake.
after Congress declared war.
Berlin had also reckoned on the inability of the Americans to transport their army, assuming that they were able to raise one.
Here again the German predictions were not far from the mark, as shipping shortages plagued the Allies.
Nevertheless, France gradually began to bustle with American doughboys.
The first trainees to reach the front were used as replacements in the Allied armies and were generally deployed in quiet sectors with the British and French.
The newcomers soon made friends with the French girlsor tried toand one of the most sung-about women in history was the fabled Mademoiselle from Armentires.
One of the printable stanzas ran American operations were not confined solely to France; small detachments fought in Belgium, Italy, and notably Russia.
The United States, hoping to keep stores of munitions from falling into German hands when Bolshevik Russia quit fighting, contributed some 5,000 troops to an Allied invasion of northern Russia at Archangel.
Wilson likewise sent nearly 10,000 troops to Siberia as part of an Allied expedition, which included more than 70,000 Japanese.
Major American purposes were to prevent Japan from getting a stranglehold on Siberia, to rescue some 45,000 marooned Czechoslovak troops, and to snatch military supplies from Bolshevik  control.
Sharp fighting at Archangel and in Siberia involved casualties on both sides, including several hundred Americans.
The Bolsheviks long resented these capitalistic interventions, which they regarded as high-handed efforts to suffocate their infant communist revolution in its cradle.
The dreaded German drive on the western front exploded in the spring of 1918.
Spearheaded by about half a million troops, the enemy rolled forward with terrifying momentum.
So dire was the peril that the Allied nations for the first time united under a supreme commander, the quiet French marshal Foch, whose axiom was, To make war is to attack.
Until then the Allies had been fighting imperfectly coordinated actions.
At last the ill-trained Yanks were comingand not a moment too soon.
Late in May 1918, the GerC HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 man juggernaut, smashing to within forty miles of Paris, threatened to knock out France.
Newly arrived American troops, numbering fewer than thirty thousand, were thrown into the breach at ChteauThierry, right in the teeth of the German advance.
This was a historic momentthe first significant engagement of American troops in a European war.
Battle-fatigued French soldiers watched incredulously as the roads filled with endless truckloads of American doughboys, singing New World songs at the top of their voices, a seemingly inexhaustible flood of fresh and gleaming youth.
With their arrival it was clear that a new American giant had arisen in the West to replace the dying Russian titan in the East.
American weight in the scales was now being felt.
By July 1918 the awesome German drive had spent its force, and keyed-up American men participated in a Foch counteroffensive in the Second Battle of the Marne.
This engagement marked the beginning of a German withdrawal that was never effectively reversed.
In September 1918 nine American divisions (about 243,000 men) joined four French divisions to push the Germans from the St.
Mihiel salient, a German dagger in Frances flank.
The Americans, dissatisfied with merely bolstering the British and French, had meanwhile been demanding a separate army.
General John J.
(Black Jack) Pershing was finally assigned a front of eighty-five miles, stretching northwestward from the Swiss border to meet the French lines.
As part of the last mighty Allied assault, involving several million men, Pershings army undertook the Meuse-Argonne offensive, from September 26 to November 11, 1918.
One objective was to cut the German railroad lines feeding the western front.
This battle, the most gargantuan thus far in American history, lasted forty-seven days and engaged 1.2 million American troops.
With especially heavy fighting in the rugged Argonne Forest, the killed and wounded mounted to 120,000, or 10 percent of the Americans involved.
The slow progress and severe losses from machine guns resulted in part from inadequate training, in part from dashing openfield tactics, with the bayonet liberally employed.
Russia Germany France British Empire Austria Italy United States MEN KILLED IN BATTLE 1,700,000     1,600,000              1,385,000                                 900,000                                      800,000                                                   462,000                                                      53,000 Approximate Comparative Losses in World War I Tennessee-bred Alvin C. York, a member of an antiwar religious sect, became a hero when he singlehandedly killed 20 Germans and captured 132 more.
Victory was in sightand fortunately so.
The slowly advancing American armies in France were eating up their supplies so rapidly that they were in grave danger of running short.
But the battered Germans were ready to stagger out of the trenches and cry Kamerad (Comrade).
Their allies were deserting them, the British blockade was causing critical food shortages, and the sledgehammer blows of the Allies rained down relentlessly.
Propaganda leaflets, containing seductive Wilsonian promises, rained upon their crumbling lines from balloons, shells, and rockets.
Berlin was now ready to hoist the white flag.
Warned of imminent defeat by the generals, it turned to the presumably softhearted Wilson in October 1918, seeking a peace based on the Fourteen Points.
In stern responses the president made it clear that the kaiser must be thrown overboard before an armistice could be negotiated.
War-weary Germans, whom Wilson had been trying to turn against their military masters, took the hint.
The kaiser was forced to flee to Holland, where he lived out his remaining twenty-three years, unwept, unhonored, and unhung.
The exhausted Germans were through.
They laid down their arms at eleven oclock on the eleventh day of the eleventh month of 1918, and an eerie, numbing silence fell over the western front.
War-taut America burst into a delirium of aroundthe-clock rejoicing, as streets were jammed with laughing, whooping, milling, dancing masses.
The war to end wars had ended.
The United States main contributions to the ultimate victory had been foodstuffs, munitions, credits, oil for this first mechanized war, and manpowerbut not battlefield victories.
The Yanks fought only two major battles, at St.
Mihiel and the Meuse-Argonne, both in the last two months of the four-year war, and they were still grinding away in the Meuse-Argonne, well short of their objectives, when the war ended.
It was the  U.S.
troop reserves, rather than Americas actual military performance, that eventually demoralized the Germans.
Ironically enough, General Pershing in some ways depended more on the Allies than they depended on him.
His army purchased more of its supplies in Europe than it shipped from the United States.
Fewer than five hundred of Pershings artillery pieces were of American manufacture.
Virtually all his aircraft were provided by the British and French.
Britain and France transported a majority of the doughboys to Europe.
The United States, in short, was no arsenal of democracy in this war; that role awaited it in the next global conflict, two decades later.
Woodrow Wilson had helped to win the war.
What part would he now play in shaping the peace?
Expectations ran extravagantly high.
As the fighting in Europe crashed to a close, the American president towered at the peak of his popularity and power.
In lonely huts in the mountains of Italy, candles burned before poster-portraits of the revered American prophet.
In Poland starry-eyed university students would meet on the streets, clasp hands, and utter only one word: Wilson.
No other man C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 had ever occupied so dizzy a pinnacle as moral leader of the world.
Wilson also had behind him the prestige of victory and the economic resources of the mightiest nation on earth.
But at this fateful moment, his sureness of touch deserted him, and he began to make a series of tragic fumbles.
Under the slogan Politics Is Adjourned, partisan political strife had been kept below the surface during the war crisis.
Hoping to strengthen his hand at the Paris peace table, Wilson broke the truce by personally appealing for a Democratic victory in the congressional elections of November 1918.
But the maneuver backfired when voters instead returned a narrow Republican majority to Congress.
Having staked his reputation on the outcome, Wilson went to Paris as a diminished leader.
Unlike all the parliamentary statesmen at the table, he did not command a legislative majority at home.
Wilsons decision to go in person to Paris to help make the peace infuriated Republicans.
At that time no president had traveled to Europe, and Wilsons journey looked to his critics like flamboyant grandstanding.
He further ruffled Republican feathers when he snubbed the Senate in assembling his peace delegation and neglected to include a single Republican senator in his official party.
The logical choice was the new chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, slender and aristocratically bewhiskered Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, a Harvard Ph.D.
But including Lodge would have been problematic for the president.
The senators mind, quipped one critic, was like the soil of his native New England: naturally barren but highly cultivated.
Wilson loathed him, and the feeling was hotly reciprocated.
An accomplished author, Lodge had been known as the scholar in politics until Wilson came on the scene.
The two men were at daggers drawn, personally and politically.
Let us dictate peace by the hammering guns and not chat about peace to the accompaniment of clicking typewriters.
The language  of the fourteen points and the subsequent statements explaining or qualifying them  are thoroughly mischievous.
Woodrow Wilson, the great prophet arisen in the West, received tumultuous welcomes from the masses of France, England, and Italy late in 1918 and early in 1919.
They saw in his idealism the promise of a better world.
But the statesmen of France and Italy were careful to keep the new messiah at arms length from worshipful crowds.
He might so arouse the people as to prompt them to overthrow their leaders and upset finespun imperialistic plans.
The Paris Conference of great and small nations fell into the hands of an inner clique, known as the Big Four.
Wilson, representing the richest and freshest great power, more or less occupied the drivers seat.
He was joined by genial Premier Vittorio Orlando of Italy and brilliant Prime Minister David Lloyd George of Britain.
Perhaps the most realistic of the quartet was cynical, hard-bitten Premier Georges Clemenceau of France, the seventy-eightyear-old organizer of victory known as the Tiger.
Speed was urgent when the conference opened on January 18, 1919.
Europe seemed to be slipping into anarchy; the red tide of communism was licking westward from Bolshevist Russia.
Wilsons ultimate goal was a world parliament to be known as the League of Nations, but he first bent his energies to preventing any vengeful parceling out of the former colonies and protectorates of the vanquished powers.
He forced through a compromise between naked imperialism and Wilsonian idealism.
The victors would not take possession of the conquered territory outright, but would receive it as trustees of the League of Nations.
Strategic Syria, for example, was awarded to France, and oilrich Iraq went to Britain.
But in practice this halfloaf solution was little more than the old prewar colonialism, thinly disguised.
C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 I am disquieted to see how hazy and vague our ideas are.
We are going to be up against the wiliest politicians in Europe.
There will be nothing hazy or vague about their ideas.
Meanwhile, Wilson had been serving as midwife for the League of Nations, which he envisioned as containing an assembly with seats for all nations and a council to be controlled by the great powers.
He gained a signal victory over the skeptical Old World diplomats in February 1919, when they agreed to make the League Covenant, Wilsons brainchild, an integral part of the final peace treaty.
At one point he spoke with such ardor for his plan that even the hard-boiled newspaper reporters forgot to take notes.
Domestic duties now required Wilson to make a quick trip to America, where ugly storms were brewing in the Senate.
Certain Republican senators, Lodge in the lead, were sharpening their knives for Wilson.
To them the League was either a useless sewing circle or an overpotent super-state.
Their hard core was composed of  a dozen or so militant isolationists, led by senators William Borah of Idaho and Hiram Johnson of California, who were known as irreconcilables or the Battalion of Death.
Thirty-nine Republican senators or senatorselectenough to defeat the treatyproclaimed that the Senate would not approve the League of Nations in its existing imperfect form.
These difficulties delighted Wilsons Allied adversaries in Paris.
They were now in a stronger bargaining position because Wilson would have to beg them for changes in the covenant that would safeguard the Monroe Doctrine and other American interests dear to the senators.
As soon as Wilson was back in Paris, hardheaded Premier Clemenceau pressed French demands for the German-inhabited Rhineland and the Saar Valley, a rich coal area.
Faced with fierce Wilsonian opposition to this violation of selfdetermination, France settled for a compromise whereby the Saar basin would remain under the League of Nations for fifteen years, and then a popular vote would determine its fate.
* In exchange for dropping its demands for the Rhineland, France got the Security Treaty, in which both Britain and America pledged to come to its aid in the event of another German invasion.
The French later felt betrayed when this pact was quickly pigeonholed by the U.S.
Senate, which shied away from all entangling alliances.
Wilsons next battle was with Italy over Fiume, a valuable seaport inhabited by both Italians and Yugoslavs.
When Italy demanded Fiume, Wilson insisted that the seaport go to Yugoslavia and appealed over the heads of Italys leaders to the countrys masses.
The maneuver fell flat.
The Italian delegates went home in a huff, while the Italian masses turned savagely against Wilson.
Another crucial struggle was with Japan over Chinas Shandong (Shantung) Peninsula and the German islands in the Pacific, which the Japanese had seized during the war.
Japan was conceded the strategic Pacific islands under a League of Nations mandate,* but Wilson staunchly opposed Japanese control of Shandong as a violation of self-determination  for its 30 million Chinese residents.
But when the  *The Saar population voted overwhelmingly to rejoin Germany in 1935.
*In due time the Japanese illegally fortified these islandsthe Marshalls, Marianas, and Carolinesand used them as bases against the United States in World War II.
Japanese threatened to walk out, Wilson reluctantly accepted a compromise whereby Japan kept Germanys economic holdings in Shandong and pledged to return the peninsula to China at a later date.
The Chinese were outraged by this imperialistic solution, while Clemenceau jeered that Wilson talked like Jesus Christ and acted like Lloyd George.
A completed Treaty of Versailles, after more weeks of wrangling, was handed to the Germans in June 1919almost literally on the point of a bayonet.
Germany had capitulated on the strength of assurances that it would be granted a peace based on the Fourteen Points.
A careful analysis of the treaty shows that only about four of the twenty-three original Wilsonian points and subsequent principles were fully honored.
Loud and bitter cries of betrayal burst from German throatscharges that Adolf Hitler would soon reiterate during his meteoric rise to power.
Wilson, of course, was guilty of no conscious betrayal.
But the Allied powers were torn by conflicting aims, many of them sanctioned by secret treaties.
There had to be compromise at Paris, or there would be no agreement.
Faced with hard realities, Wilson was forced to compromise away some of his less cherished Fourteen Points in order to salvage the more precious League of Nations.
He was much like the mother who had to throw her sickly younger children to the pursuing wolves to save her sturdy firstborn.
A troubled Wilson was not happy with the results.
Greeted a few months earlier with frenzied acclaim in Europe, he was now a fallen idol, condemned alike by disillusioned liberals and frustrated imperialists.
He was keenly aware of some of the injustices that had been forced into the treaty.
But he was hoping that the League of Nationsa potent League with America as a leaderwould iron out the inequities.
Yet the loudly condemned treaty had much to commend it.
Not least among its merits was its liberation of millions of minority peoples, such as the Poles, from the yoke of an alien dynasty.
Disappointing though Wilsons handiwork was, he saved the pact from being an old-time peace of grasping imperialism.
His critics to the contrary, the settlement was almost certainly a fairer one because he had gone to Paris.
Returning for the second and final time to America, Wilson sailed straight into a political typhoon.
Isolationists raised a whirlwind of protest against the treaty, especially against Wilsons commitment to usher the United States into his newfangled League of Nations.
Invoking the revered advice of Washington and Jefferson, they wanted no part of any entangling alliance.
Nor were the isolationists Wilsons only problem.
Critics showered the Treaty of Versailles with abuse from all sides.
Rabid Hun-haters, regarding the pact as not harsh enough, voiced their discontent.
Principled liberals, like the editors of the New York  thought it too harshand a gross betrayal to boot.
German-Americans, Italian-Americans, and other hyphenated Americans were aroused because the peace settlement was not sufficiently favorable to their native lands.
Irish-Americans, traditional twisters of the British lions tail, also denounced the League.
They felt that with the additional votes of the five overseas British dominions, it gave Britain undue influence, and they feared that it could be used to force the United States to crush any rising for Irish independence.
Crowds of Irish-American zealots hissed and booed Wilsons name.
Despite mounting discontent, the president had reason to feel optimistic.
When he brought home the treaty, with the Wilson League firmly riveted in as Part I, a strong majority of the people still seemed favorable.
At this timeearly July 1919Senator Lodge had no real hope of defeating the Treaty of Versailles.
His strategy was merely to amend it in such a way as to Americanize, Republicanize, or senatorialize it.
The Republicans could then claim political credit for the changes.
Lodge effectively used delay to muddle and divide public opinion.
He read the entire 264-page treaty aloud in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and held protracted hearings in which people of various nationalities aired their grievances.
Wilson fretted increasingly as the hot summer of 1919 wore on.
The bulky pact was bogged down C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 in the Senate, while the nation was drifting into confusion and apathy.
He therefore decided to go to the country in a spectacular speechmaking tour.
He would appeal over the heads of the Senate to the sovereign peopleas he often had in the past.
The strenuous barnstorming campaign was undertaken in the face of protests by physicians and friends.
Wilson had never been robust; he had entered the White House nearly seven years before with a stomach pump and with headache pills for his neuritis.
His frail body had begun to sag under the strain of partisan strife, a global war, and a stressful peace conference.
But he declared that he was willing to die, like the soldiers he had sent into battle, for the sake of the new world order.
The presidential tour, begun in September 1919, got off to a rather lame start.
The Midwest received Wilson lukewarmly, partly because of strong GermanAmerican influence.
Trailing after him like bloodhounds came two irreconcilable senators, Borah and Johnson, who spoke in the same cities a few days later.
Hat-tossing crowds answered their attacks on Wilson, crying, Impeach him, impeach him!
But the reception was different in the Rocky Mountain region and on the Pacific Coast.
These areas, which had elected Wilson in 1916, welcomed him with heartwarming outbursts.
The high point and the breaking pointof the return trip was at Pueblo, Colorado, September 25, 1919.
Wilson, with tears coursing down his cheeks, pleaded for the League of Nations as the only real hope of preventing future wars.
That night he collapsed from physical and nervous exhaustion.
Wilson was whisked back in the funeral train to Washington, where several days later a stroke paralyzed one side of his body.
During the next few weeks, he lay in a darkened room in the White House, as much a victim of the war as the unknown soldier buried at Arlington.
For more than seven months, he did not meet his cabinet.
Senator Lodge, coldly calculating, was now at the helm.
After failing to amend the treaty outright, he finally came up with fourteen formal reservations to ita sardonic slap at Wilsons Fourteen Points.
These safeguards reserved the rights of the United States under the Monroe Doctrine and the Constitution and otherwise sought to protect American sovereignty.
Senator Lodge and other critics were especially alarmed by Article X of the League because it  any member victimized by external aggression.
A jealous Congress wanted to reserve for itself the constitutional war-declaring power.
Wilson, hating Lodge, saw red at the mere suggestion of the Lodge reservations.
He was quite willing to accept somewhat similar reservations sponsored by his faithful Democratic followers, but he insisted that the Lodge reservations emasculated the entire pact.
Although too feeble to lead, Wilson was still strong enough to obstruct.
When the day finally came for the voting in the Senate, he sent word to all true Democrats to vote  odious Lodge reservations attached.
Wilson hoped that when these were cleared away, the path would be open for ratification without reservations or with only some mild Democratic ones.
Loyal Democrats in the Senate, on November 19, 1919, blindly did Wilsons bidding.
Combining with the irreconcilables, mostly Republicans, they rejected the treaty with the Lodge reservations appended, 55 to 39.
The nation was too deeply shocked to accept the verdict as final.
About four-fifths of the senators professed to favor the treaty, with or without reservations, yet a simple majority could not agree on a single proposition.
So strong was public indignation that the Senate was forced to act a second time.
In March 1920 the treaty was brought up again, with the Lodge reservations tacked on.
There was only one possible path to success.
Unless the Senate approved the pact with the reservations, the entire document would be rejected.
But the sickly Wilson, still sheltered behind drawn curtains and blind to disagreeable realities, again sent word to all loyal Democrats to vote down the treaty with the obnoxious reservations.
He thus signed the death warrant of the treaty as far as America was concerned.
On March 19, 1920, the treaty netted a simple majority but failed to get the necessary twothirds majority by a count of 49 yeas to 35 nays.
Who defeated the treaty?
The Lodge-Wilson  personal feud, traditionalism, isolationism, disillusionment, and partisanship all contributed to the confused picture.
But Wilson himself must bear a substantial share of the responsibility.
He asked for all or nothingand got nothing.
One Democratic senator angrily charged that the president had strangled his own brainchild with his own palsied hands rather than let the Senate straighten its crooked limbs.
Wilson had his own pet solution for the deadlock, and this partly explains why he refused to compromise on Lodges terms.
He proposed to settle the treaty issue in the forthcoming presidential campaign of 1920 by appealing to the people for a solemn referendum.
This was sheer folly, for a true mandate on the League in the noisy arena of politics was clearly an impossibility.
Jubilant Republicans gathered in Chicago in June 1920 with wayward bull moosers back in the corral (after Theodore Roosevelts death in 1919) and the senatorial Old Guard back in the saddle.
The convention devised a masterfully ambiguous platform that could appeal to both pro-League and anti-League sentiment in the party.
The nominee would run on a teeter-totter rather than a platform.
As the leading presidential contestants jousted with one another, the political weathervane began to veer toward genial Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio.
A group of Senate bosses, meeting rather casually  in the historic smoke-filled Room 404 of the Hotel Blackstone, informally decided on the affable and malleable Ohioan.
Their fair-haired boy was a prosperous, backslapping, small-town newspaper editor of the folksy type, quite the opposite of Wilson, who had earlier noted the senators disturbingly dull mind.
For vice president the party nominated frugal, grim-faced Governor Calvin (Silent Cal) Coolidge of Massachusetts, who had attracted conservative support by breaking a police strike in Boston.
Meeting in San Francisco, Democrats nominated earnest Governor James M. Cox of Ohio, who strongly supported the League.
His running mate was Assistant Navy Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, a young, handsome, vibrant New Yorker.
Democratic attempts to make the campaign a referendum on the League were thwarted by Senator Harding, who issued muddled and contradictory statements on the issue from his front porch.
ProLeague and anti-League Republicans both claimed that Hardings election would advance their cause, while the candidate suggested that if elected he would work for a vague Association of Nations league but not  With newly enfranchised women swelling the vote totals, Harding was swept into power with a prodigious plurality of over 7 million votes 16,143,407 to 9,130,328 for Cox.
The electoral count was 404 to 127.
Eugene V. Debs, federal prisoner number 9653 at the Atlanta Penitentiary, rolled up the largest vote ever for the left-wing Socialist party919,799.
Public desire for a change found vent in a resounding repudiation of high-and-mighty Wilsonism.
People were tired of professional highbrowism, star-reaching idealism, bothersome dogoodism, moral overstrain, and constant selfsacrifice.
Eager to lapse back into normalcy, they were willing to accept a second-rate presidentand they got a third-rate one.
C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 Although the election could not be considered a true referendum, Republican isolationists successfully turned Hardings victory into a death sentence for the League.
Politicians increasingly shunned the League as they would a leper.
When the legendary Wilson died in 1924, admirers knelt in the snow outside his Washington home.
His great vision of a league for peace had perished long before.
Americas spurning of the League was tragically shortsighted.
The Republic had helped to win a costly war, but it foolishly kicked the fruits of victory under the table.
Whether a strong international organization would have averted World War II in 1939 will always be a matter of dispute.
But there can be no doubt that the orphaned League of Nations was undercut at the start by the refusal of the mightiest power on the globe to join it.
The Allies themselves were largely to blame for the new world conflagration that flared up in 1939, but they found a convenient justification for their own shortcomings by pointing an accusing finger at Uncle Sam.
The ultimate collapse of the Treaty of Versailles must be laid, at least in some degree, at Americas doorstep.
This complicated pact, tied in with the four other peace treaties through the League Covenant, was a top-heavy structure designed to rest on a four-legged table.
The fourth leg, the United States, was never put into place.
This rickety structure teetered for over a decade and then crashed in ruinsa debacle that played into the hands of the German demagogue Adolf Hitler.
No less ominous events were set in motion when the Senate spurned the Security Treaty with France.
The French, fearing that a new generation of Germans would follow in their fathers goose steps, undertook to build up a powerful military force.
Predictably resenting the presence of strong French armies, Germany began to rearm illegally.
The seething cauldron of uncertainty and suspicion brewed an intoxicant that helped inflame the fanatical following of Hitler.
The United States, as the tragic sequel proved, hurt its own cause when it buried its head in the sand.
Granted that the conduct of its Allies had been disillusioning, it had its own ends to serve by carrying through the Wilsonian program.
It would have been well advised if it had forthrightly assumed its war-born responsibilities and had resolutely embraced the role of global leader proffered by the hand of destiny.
In the interests of its own security, if for no other reason, the United States should have used its enormous strength to shape world-shaking events.
Instead it permitted itself blythely to drift toward the abyss of a second and even more bloody international disaster.
WASH.
7 ORE.
5 CALIF.
13 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
3 S.D.
5 KANSAS 10 OKLA.
10 MICH.
15 N.Y.
45 N.D.
5 MINN.
12 IOWA 13 NEBR.
8 MO.
18 ARK.
9 LA.
10 TEXAS 20 N.M.
3 MISS.
10 ALA.
12 GA.
14 FLA.
6 TENN.
12 N.C.
12 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 PA.
38 OHIO 24 IND.
15 ILL.
29 WISC.
13 KY.
13 ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
18 R.I.
5 CONN.
7 N.J.
14 DEL.
3 MD.
8 HardingRepublican CoxDemocratic Presidential Election of 1920 (with electoral vote by state) Cox rashly claimed that traitors would vote Republican.
But Harding and Coolidge ran successfully as small-town boys who had made good.
Harding celebrated his fiftyfifth birthday on election day, and the voters presented him with the largest victory margin to date in a U.S.
presidential election.
C HAPTER 31 The War to End War, 19171918 s the first president to take the United States into a foreign war, Woodrow Wilson was obliged to make a systematic case to the American people to justify his unprecedented European intervention.
His ideas have largely defined the character of American foreign policy ever sincefor better or worse.
Wilsonianism comprises three closely related principles: (1) the era of American isolation from world affairs has irretrievably ended; (2) the United States must infuse its own founding political and economic ideasincluding democracy, the rule of law, free trade, and national self-determination (or anticolonialism)into the international order; and (3) American influence can eventually steer the world away from rivalry and warfare toward a cooperative and peaceful international system, maintained by the League of Nations or, later, the United Nations.
Whether that Wilsonian vision constitutes hardnosed realism or starry-eyed idealism has excited scholarly debate for nearly a century.
Realists, such as George F. Kennan and Henry Kissinger, insist Wilson was anything but.
They criticize the president as a naive, impractical dreamer who failed to understand that the international order is, and always will be, an anarchic, unruly arena, outside the rule of law, where only military force can effectively protect the nations security.
In a sharp critique in his 1950 study,  Kennan condemned Wilsons vision as moralismlegalism.
In this view Wilson dangerously threatened to sacrifice American self-interests on the altar of his admirable but ultimately unworkable ideas.
Wilsons defenders, including conspicuously his principal biographer, Arthur S. Link, argue that Wilsons idealism was in fact a kind of higher realism, recognizing as it did that armed conflict on the scale of World War I could never again be tolerated and that some framework of peaceful international relations simply had to be found.
The development of nuclear weapons in a later generation gave this argument still more force.
This liberal defense of Wilsonianism derives from the centuries-old liberal faith that, given sufficient intelligence and willpower, the world can be made into a better place.
Realists reject this notion of moral and political progress as hopelessly innocent, especially as applied to international affairs.
Council of National Defense established Germany resumes unrestricted submarine warfare Zimmermann note United States enters World War I Espionage Act of 1917 Wilson proposes the Fourteen Points Sedition Act of 1918 Battle of Chteau-Thierry Second Battle of the Marne Meuse-Argonne offensive Armistice ends World War I Paris Peace Conference and Treaty of  Versailles Wilsons pro-League tour and collapse Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition of alcohol) passed Final Senate defeat of Versailles Treaty Nineteenth Amendment (woman suffrage) passed Harding defeats Cox for presidency Some leftist scholars, such as William Appleman Williams, have argued that Wilson was in fact a realist of another kind: a subtle and wily imperialist whose stirring rhetoric cloaked a grasping ambition to make the United States the worlds dominant economic power.
Sometimes called the imperialism of free trade, this strategy allegedly sought to decolonialize the world and open up international commerce not for the good of peoples elsewhere, but to create a system in which American economic might would irresistibly prevail.
This criticism itself rests on a naive assumption that international relations are a zero-sum game, in which one nations gain must necessarily be another nations loss.
In a Wilsonian world, Wilsons defenders claim,  ties would be better off; altruism and self-interest are not mutually exclusive.
Still other scholars, especially John Milton Cooper, Jr., emphasize the absence of economic factors in shaping Wilsons diplomacy.
Isolationism, so this argument goes, held such sway over American thinking precisely because the United States had such a puny financial stake abroadno hard American economic interests were mortally threatened in 1917, nor for a long time thereafter.
In these circumstances Wilsonand the Wilsonians who came after him, such as Franklin D. Roosevelthad no choice but to appeal to abstract ideals and high principles.
The idealistic Wilsonian strain in American diplomacy, in this view, may be an unavoidable heritage of Americas historically isolated situation.
If so, it was Wilsons genius to make practical use of those ideas in his bid for popular support of his diplomacy.
For further reading, see page A21 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  American Life in the Roaring Twenties  19191929 W ARREN G. H ARDING , 1920 B loodied by the war and disillusioned by the peace, Americans turned inward in the 1920s.
Shunning diplomatic commitments to foreign countries, they also denounced radical foreign ideas, condemned un-American lifestyles, and clanged shut the immigration gates against foreign peoples.
They partly sealed off the domestic economy from the rest of the world and plunged headlong into a dizzying decade of homegrown prosperity.
The boom of the golden twenties showered genuine benefits on Americans, as incomes and living standards rose for many.
But there seemed to be something incredible about it all, even as people sang, New technologies, new consumer products, and new forms of leisure and entertainment made the twenties roar.
Yet just beneath the surface lurked widespread anxieties about the future and fears that America was losing sight of its traditional ways.
Hysterical fears of red Russia continued to color American thinking for several years after the Bolshevik revolution of 1917, which spawned a tiny Communist party in America.
Tensions were heightened by an epidemic of strikes that convulsed the Republic at wars end, many of them the result of high prices and frustrated union-organizing drives.
Upstanding Americans jumped to the conclusion that labor troubles were fomented by bomb-andwhisker Bolsheviks.
A general strike in Seattle in 1919, though modest in its demands and orderly in its methods, prompted a call from the mayor for federal troops to head off the anarchy of Russia.
Fire-and-brimstone evangelist Billy Sunday struck a responsive chord when he described a Bolshevik as a guy with a face like a porcupine and a breath that would scare a pole cat.
If I had my way, Id fill the jails so full of them that their feet would stick out the window.
The big red scare of 19191920 resulted in a nationwide crusade against left-wingers whose Americanism was suspect.
Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, who saw red too easily, earned the title of the Fighting Quaker by his excess of zeal in rounding up suspects.
They ultimately totaled about six thousand.
This drive to root out radicals was redoubled in June 1919, when a bomb shattered both the nerves and the Washington home of Palmer.
The Fighting Quaker was thereupon dubbed the Quaking Fighter.
Other events highlighted the red scare.
Late in December 1919, a shipload of 249 alleged alien radicals was deported on the  workers paradise of Russia.
One zealot cried, My motto for the Reds is S.O.S.ship or shoot.
Hysteria was temporarily revived in September 1920, when a still-unexplained bomb blast on Wall Street killed thirty-eight people and wounded several hundred others.
Various states joined the pack in the outcry against radicals.
In 19191920 a number of legislatures, reflecting the anxiety of solid citizens, passed criminal syndicalism laws.
These antired statutes, some of which were born of the war, made unlawful the mere  social change.
Critics protested that mere words were not criminal deeds, that there was a great gulf between throwing fits and throwing bombs, and that free screech was for the nasty as well as the nice.
Violence was done to traditional American concepts of free speech as IWW members and other radicals were vigorously prosecuted.
The hysteria went so far that in 1920 five members of the New York legislature, all lawfully elected, were denied their seats simply because they were Socialists.
The red scare was a godsend to conservative businesspeople, who used it to break the backs of the fledgling unions.
Labors call for the closed, or all-union, shop was denounced as Sovietism in  disguise.
Employers, in turn, hailed their own  antiunion campaign for the open shop as the American plan.
Antiredism and antiforeignism were reflected in a notorious case regarded by liberals as a judicial lynching.
Nicola Sacco, a shoe-factory worker, and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, a fish peddler, were convicted in 1921 of the murder of a Massachusetts paymaster and his guard.
The jury and judge were prejudiced I believe we should place them [the reds] all on a ship of stone, with sails of lead, and that their first stopping place should be hell.
in some degree against the defendants because they were Italians, atheists, anarchists, and draft dodgers.
Liberals and radicals the world over rallied to the defense of the two aliens doomed to die.
The case dragged on for six years until 1927, when  the condemned men were electrocuted.
Communists and other radicals were thus presented with two martyrs in the class struggle, while many American liberals hung their heads.
The evidence against the accused, though damaging, betrayed serious weaknesses.
If the trial had been held in an atmosphere less charged with antiredism, the outcome might well have been only a prison term.
A new Ku Klux Klan, spawned by the postwar  reaction, mushroomed fearsomely in the early 1920s.
Despite the familiar sheets and hoods, it more closely resembled the antiforeign nativist movements of the 1850s than the antiblack nightriders of the 1860s.
It was antiforeign, antiCatholic, antiblack, anti-Jewish, antipacifist, antiCommunist, anti-internationalist, antievolutionist, antibootlegger, antigambling, antiadultery, and antibirth control.
It was also proAnglo-Saxon, pronative American, and pro-Protestant.
In short, the besheeted Klan betokened an extremist, ultraconservative uprising against many of the forces of diversity and modernity that were transforming American culture.
As reconstituted, the Klan spread with astonishing rapidity, especially in the Midwest and the Bible Belt South.
At its peak in the mid-1920s, it claimed about 5 million dues-paying members and wielded potent political influence.
It capitalized on the typically American love of on-the-edge adventure and in-group camaraderie, to say nothing of the adolescent ardor for secret ritual.
Knights of the Invisible Empire included among their officials Imperial Wizards, Grand Goblins, King Kleagles, and other horrendous kreatures.
The most impressive displays were konclaves and huge flag-waving parades.
The chief warning was the blazing cross.
The principal weapon was the bloodied lash, supplemented by tar and feathers.
Rallying songs were The Fiery Cross on High, One Hundred Percent American, and The Ku Klux Klan and the Pope (against kissing the Popes toe).
One brutal slogan was Kill the Kikes, Koons, and Katholics.
This reign of hooded horror, so repulsive to the best American ideals, collapsed rather suddenly in the late 1920s.
Decent people at last recoiled from the orgy of ribboned flesh and terrorism, while scandalous embezzling by Klan officials launched a congressional investigation.
The bubble was punctured when the movement was exposed as a vicious racket based on a $10 initiation fee, $4 of which was kicked back to local organizers as an incentive to recruit.
The KKK was an alarming manifestation of the intolerance and prejudice plaguing people anxious about the dizzying pace of social change in the 1920s.
America needed no such cowardly apostles, whose white sheets concealed dark purposes.
Isolationist America of the 1920s, ingrown and provincial, had little use for the immigrants who began to flood into the country again as peace  settled soothingly on the war-torn world.
Some 800,000 stepped ashore in 19201921, about twoC HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 thirds of them from southern and eastern Europe.
The one-hundred-percent Americans, recoiling at the sight of this resumed New Immigration, once again cried that the famed poem at the base of the Statue of Liberty was all too literally true: they claimed that a sickly Europe was indeed vomiting on America the wretched refuse of its teeming shore.
Congress temporarily plugged the breach with the Emergency Quota Act of 1921.
Newcomers from Europe were restricted in any given year to a definite quota, which was set at 3 percent of the people of their nationality who had been living in the United States in 1910.
This national-origins system was relatively favorable to the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, for by 1910 immense numbers of them had already arrived.
This stopgap legislation of 1921 was replaced by the Immigration Act of 1924.
Quotas for foreigners were cut from 3 percent to 2 percent.
The nationalorigins base was shifted from the census of 1910 to that of 1890, when comparatively few southern Europeans had arrived.
* Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for example, could send 65,721 a year as against 5,802 for Italy.
Southern Europeans bitterly denounced the device as unfair and discriminatorya triumph for the nativist belief that blueeyed and fair-haired northern Europeans were of better blood.
The purpose was clearly to freeze Americas existing racial composition, which was largely northern European.
A flagrantly discriminatory section of the Immigration Act of 1924 slammed the door absolutely against Japanese immigrants.
Mass Hate America rallies erupted in Japan, and one Japanese superpatriot expressed his outrage by committing suicide near the American embassy in Tokyo.
Exempt from the quota system were Canadians and Latin Americans, whose proximity made them easy to attract for jobs when times were good and just as easy to send back home when they were not.
The quota system effected a pivotal departure in American policy.
It claimed that the nation was filling up and that a No Vacancy sign was needed.
Immigration henceforth dwindled to a mere trickle.
By 1931, probably for the first time in American experience, more foreigners left than arrived.
Quotas thus caused America to sacrifice something of its tradition of freedom and opportunity, as well as its future ethnic diversity.
The Immigration Act of 1924 marked the end of an eraa period of virtually unrestricted immigration that in the preceding century had brought some 35 million newcomers to the United States, mostly from Europe.
The immigrant tide was now cut off, but it left on American shores by the 1920s a *Five years later the Act of 1929, using 1920 as the quota base, virtually cut immigration in half by limiting the total to 152,574 a year.
In 1965 Congress abolished the national-origins quota system.
The typical immigrant of the present does not really live in America at all, but, from the point of view of nationality, in Italy, Poland, Czecho-Slovakia, or some other foreign country.
patchwork of ethnic communities separated from each other and from the larger society by language, religion, and customs.
Many of the most recent arrivals, including the Italians, Jews, and Poles, lived in isolated enclaves with their own houses of worship, newspapers, and theaters (see Makers of America: The Poles, pp.
734735).
Efforts to organize labor unions repeatedly foundered on the rocks of ethnic differences.
Immigrant workers on the same shop floor might share a common interest in wages and working conditions, but they often had no  common language with which to forge common cause; indeed cynical employers often played upon ethnic rivalries to keep their workers divided and powerless.
Ethnic variety thus undermined class and political solidarity.
It was an old American story, but one that some reformers hoped would not go on forever.
One of the last peculiar spasms of the progressive reform movement was prohibition, loudly supported by crusading churches and by many women.
The arid new order was authorized in 1919 by the Eighteenth Amendment (see the Appendix), as implemented by the Volstead Act passed by Congress later that year.
Together these laws made the world safe for hypocrisy.
The legal abolition of alcohol was especially popular in the South and West.
Southern whites were eager to keep stimulants out of the hands of blacks, lest they burst out of their place.
In the West prohibition represented an attack on all the vices associated with the ubiquitous western saloon: public drunkenness, prostitution, corruption, and crime.
But despite the overwhelming ratification of the dry amendment, strong opposition persisted in the larger eastern cities.
For many wet foreign-born people, Old World styles of sociability were built around drinking in beer gardens and corC HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 Average annual inflow,  19071914 Quotas under Act of 1921 Quotas under Act of 1924 Quotas under NationalOrigins Provision of 1929 Quotas under McCarranWalter Act of 1952 Immigrants from Northern and  Western Europe Immigrants from other countries,  principally Southern and Eastern Europe                 176,983                                                                           685,531                    198,082                158,367               140,999 21,847             132,323 20,251            125,165  29,492 Annual Immigration and the Quota Laws The national-origins quota system was abolished  in 1965.
Legislation in that year capped the level of immigration at 170,000 per year but made exceptions for children, spouses, and parents of persons already arrived.
It also restricted immigration from any single country to 20,000 people per year.
The immigration laws  were again significantly revised in 1986 (see p.
930 and p.
1023).
From now on it will cost a man his job .
to have the odor of beer, wine or liquor on his breath, or to have any of these intoxicants on his person or in his home.
The Eighteenth Amendment is a part of the fundamental laws of this country.
It was meant to be enforced.
Politics has interfered with the enforcement of this law, but so far as our organization is concerned, it is going to be enforced to the letter.
ner taverns.
Yet most Americans now assumed that prohibition had come to stay.
Everywhere carousers indulged in last wild flings, as the nation prepared to enter upon a permanent alcoholiday.
But prohibitionists were naive in the extreme.
They overlooked the tenacious American tradition of strong drink and of weak control by the central government, especially over private lives.
They forgot that the federal authorities had never satisfactorily enforced a law where the majority of the peopleor a strong minoritywere hostile to it.
They ignored the fact that one cannot make a crime overnight out of something that millions of people have never regarded as a crime.
Lawmakers could not legislate away a thirst.
Peculiar conditions hampered the enforcement of prohibition.
Profound disillusionment over the aftermath of the war raised serious questions as to the wisdom of further self-denial.
Slaking thirst became a cherished personal liberty, and many ardent wets believed that the way to bring about repeal was to violate the law on a large enough scale.
Hypocritical, hip-flasked legislators spoke or voted dry while privately drinking wet.
(Let us strike a blow for liberty was an ironic toast.
) Frustrated soldiers, returning from France, complained that prohibition had been put over on them while they were over there.
Grimy workers bemoaned the loss of their cheap beer, while pointing out that the idle rich could buy all the illicit alcohol they wanted.
Flaming youth of the jazz age thought it smart to swill bootleg liquorliquid tonsillectomies.
Millions of older citizens likewise found forbidden fruit fascinating, as they engaged in bar hunts.
Prohibition might have started off on a better foot if there had been a larger army of enforcement officials.
But the state and federal agencies were understaffed, and their snoopers, susceptible to bribery, were underpaid.
The public was increasingly distressed as scores of people, including innocent bystanders, were killed by quick-triggered dry agents.
Prohibition simply did not prohibit.
The oldtime men only corner saloons were replaced by thousands of speakeasies, each with its tiny grilled window through which the thirsty spoke softly before the barred door was opened.
Hard liquor, especially the cocktail, was drunk in staggering volume by both men and women.
Largely because of he Poles were among the largest immigrant groups to respond to industrializing Americas call for badly needed labor after the Civil War.
Between 1870 and World War I, some 2 million Polish-speaking peasants boarded steamships bound for the United States.
By the 1920s, when antiforeign feeling led to restrictive legislation that choked the immigrant stream to a trickle, Polish immigrants and their American-born children began to develop new identities as Polish-Americans.
The first Poles to arrive in the New World had landed in Jamestown in 1608 and helped to develop that colonys timber industry.
Over the ensuing two and a half centuries, scattered religious dissenters and revolutionary nationalists also made their way from Poland to America.
During the Revolution about one hundred Poles, including two officers recruited by Benjamin Franklin, served in the Continental Army.
But the Polish hopefuls who poured into the United States in the late nineteenth century came primarily to stave off starvation and to earn money to buy land.
Known in their homeland as  (for bread) emigrants, they belonged to the mass of central and eastern European peasants who had been forced off their farms by growing competition from the large-scale, mechanized agriculture of western Europe and the United States.
An exceptionally high birthrate among the Catholic Poles compounded this economic pressure, creating an army of the land-poor and landless, who left their homes seasonally or permanently in search of work.
In 1891 farmworkers and unskilled laborers in the United States earned about $1 a day, more than eight times as much as agricultural workers in  the Polish province of Galicia.
Such a magnet was irresistible.
These Polish-speaking newcomers emigrated not from a unified nation, but from a weakened country that had been partitioned in the eighteenth century by three great European powers: Prussia (later Germany), Austria-Hungary, and Russia.
The Prussian Poles, driven from their homeland in part by the anti-Catholic policies that the German imperial government pursued in the 1870s, arrived in America first.
Fleeing religious persecution as well as economic turmoil, many of these early immigrants came to the United States intending to stay.
By contrast, most of those who came later from Austrian and Russian Poland simply hoped to earn enough American dollars to return home and buy land.
Some of the Polish peasants learned of America from propaganda spread throughout Europe by agents for U.S.
railroad and steamship lines.
But many more were lured by glowing letters from friends and relatives already living in the United States.
The first wave of Polish immigrants had established a thriving network of self-help and fraternal associations organized around Polish Catholic parishes.
Often Polish-American entrepreneurs helped their European compatriots make travel arrangements or find jobs in the United States.
One of the most successful of these, the energetic Chicago grocer Anton Schermann, is credited with bringing over 100,000 Poles and causing the Windy City to earn the nickname the American Warsaw.
Most of the Poles arriving in the United States in the late nineteenth century headed for booming industrial cities such as Buffalo, Pittsburgh, Detroit, Milwaukee, and Chicago.
In 1907 four-fifths of the men toiled as unskilled laborers in coal mines, meatpacking factories, textile and steel mills, oil refineries, and garment-making shops.
Although married women usually stayed home and contributed to the familys earnings by taking in laundry and boarders, children and single girls often joined their fathers and brothers on the job.
By putting the whole family to work, Americas Polish immigrants saved tidy sums.
By 1901 about one-third of all Poles in the United States owned real estate, and they sent so much money to relatives in Austria and Russia that American and European authorities fretted about the consequences: in 1907 a nativist U.S.
immigration commission groused that the huge outflow of funds to eastern Europe was weakening the U.S.
economy.
When an independent Poland was created after World War I, few Poles chose to return to their Old World homeland.
Instead, like other immigrant groups in the 1920s, they redoubled their efforts to integrate into American society.
Polish institutions like churches and fraternal organizations, which had served to perpetuate a distinctive Polish culture in the New World, now facilitated the transformation of Poles into Polish-Americans.
When Poland was absorbed into the communist bloc after World War II, Polish-Americans clung still more tightly to their American identity, pushing for landmarks like Chicagos Pulaski Road to memorialize their culture in the New World.
the difficulties of transporting and concealing bottles, beverages of high alcoholic content were popular.
Foreign rumrunners, often from the West Indies, had their inning, and countless cases of liquor leaked down from Canada.
The zeal of American prohibition agents on occasion strained diplomatic relations with Uncle Sams northern neighbor.
Home brew and bathtub gin became popular, as law-evading adults engaged in alky cooking with toy stills.
The worst of the homemade rotgut produced blindness, even death.
The affable bootlegger worked in silent partnership with the friendly undertaker.
Yet the noble experiment was not entirely a failure.
Bank savings increased, and absenteeism in industry decreased, presumably because of the newly sober ways of formerly soused barflies.
On the whole, probably less alcohol was consumed than in the days before prohibition, though strong drink continued to be available.
As the legendary tippler remarked, prohibition was a darn sight better than no liquor at all.
Prohibition spawned shocking crimes.
The lush profits of illegal alcohol led to bribery of the police, many of whom were induced to see and smell no evil.
Violent wars broke out in the big cities between rival gangsoften rooted in immigrant neighborhoodswho sought to corner the rich market in booze.
Rival triggermen used their sawed-off shotguns and chattering typewriters (machine guns) to erase bootlegging competitors who were trying to muscle in on their racket.
In the gang wars of the 1920s in Chicago, about five hundred mobsters were murdered.
Arrests were few and convictions were even fewer, as the button-lipped gangsters covered for one another with the underworlds code of silence.
Chicago was by far the most spectacular example of lawlessness.
In 1925 Scarface Al Capone, a grasping and murderous booze distributor, began six years of gang warfare that netted him millions of blood-spattered dollars.
He zoomed through the streets in an armor-plated car with bulletproof windows.
A Brooklyn newspaper quipped, Capone, though branded Public Enemy Number One, could not be convicted of the cold-blooded massacre, on St.
Valentines Day in 1929, of seven disarmed members of a rival gang.
But after serving most of an eleven-year sentence in a federal penitentiary for income-tax evasion, he was released as a syphilitic wreck.
Gangsters rapidly moved into other profitable and illicit activities: prostitution, gambling, and narcotics.
Honest merchants were forced to pay protection money to the organized thugs; otherwise their windows would be smashed, their trucks overturned, or their employees or themselves beaten up.
Racketeers even invaded the ranks of C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 local labor unions as organizers and promoters.
Organized crime had come to be one of the nations most gigantic businesses.
By 1930 the annual take of the underworld was estimated to be from $12 billion to $18 billionseveral times the income of the Washington government.
Criminal callousness sank to new depths in 1932 with the kidnapping for ransom, and eventual murder, of the infant son of aviator-hero Charles A. Lindbergh.
The entire nation was inexpressibly shocked and saddened, causing Congress in 1932 to pass the so-called Lindbergh Law, making interstate abduction in certain circumstances a death-penalty offense.
Education in the 1920s continued to make giant bootstrides.
More and more states were requiring young people to remain in school until age sixteen or eighteen, or until graduation from high school.
The proportion of seventeen-year-olds who finished high school almost doubled in the 1920s, to more than one in four.
The most revolutionary contribution to educational theory during these yeasty years was made by mild-mannered Professor John Dewey, who served on the faculty of Columbia University from 1904 to 1930.
By common consent one of Americas few front-rank philosophers, he set forth the principles of learning by doing that formed the foundation of so-called progressive education, with its greater permissiveness.
He believed that the workbench was as essential as the blackboard, and that education for life should be a primary goal of the teacher.
Science also scored wondrous advances in these years.
A massive public-health program, launched by the Rockefeller Foundation in the South in 1909, had virtually wiped out the ancient affliction of hookworm by the 1920s.
Better nutrition and health care helped to increase the life expectancy of a newborn infant from fifty years in 1901 to fifty-nine years in 1929.
Yet both science and progressive education in the 1920s were subjected to unfriendly fire from  the Fundamentalists.
These old-time religionists charged that the teaching of Darwinian evolution was destroying faith in God and the Bible, while contributing to the moral breakdown of youth in the jazz age.
Numerous attempts were made to secure laws prohibiting the teaching of evolution, the bestial hypothesis, in the public schools, and three southern states adopted such shackling measures.
The trio of states included Tennessee, in the heart of Nordic Americans for the last generation have found themselves increasingly  uncomfortable and finally deeply distressed.
One by one all our traditional moral standards went by the boards, or were so disregarded that they ceased to be binding.
The sacredness of our Sabbath, of our homes, of chastity, and finally even of our right to teach our own children in our own schools fundamental facts and truths were torn away from us.
Those who maintained the old standards did so only in the face of constant ridicule.
We found our great cities and the control of much of our industry and commerce taken over by strangers.
We are a movement of the plain people, very weak in the matter of culture, intellectual support, and trained leadership.
This is undoubtedly a weakness.
It lays us open to the charge of being hicks and rubes and drivers of second-hand Fords.
If a minister believes and teaches evolution, he is a stinking skunk, a hypocrite, and a liar.
the so-called Bible Belt South, where the spirit of evangelical religion was still robust.
The stage was set for the memorable Monkey Trial at the hamlet of Dayton, eastern Tennessee, in 1925.
A likable high-school biology teacher, John T. Scopes, was indicted for teaching evolution.
Batteries of newspaper reporters, armed with notebooks and cameras, descended upon the quiet town to witness the spectacle.
Scopes was defended by nationally known attorneys, while former presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan, an ardent Presbyterian Fundamentalist, joined the prosecution.
Taking the stand as an expert on the Bible, Bryan was made to appear foolish by the famed criminal lawyer Clarence Darrow.
Five days after the trial was over, Bryan died of a stroke, no doubt brought on by the wilting heat and witness-stand strain.
This historic clash between theology and biology proved inconclusive.
Scopes, the forgotten man of the drama, was found guilty and fined $100.
But the supreme court of Tennessee, while upholding the law, set aside the fine on a technicality.
* The Fundamentalists at best won only a hollow victory, for the absurdities of the trial cast ridicule on their cause.
Yet even though increasing numbers of Christians were coming to reconcile the revelations of religion with the findings of modern science, Fundamentalism, with its emphasis on literal reading of the Bible, remained a vibrant force in American spiritual life.
It was especially strong in the Baptist Church and in the rapidly growing Churches of Christ, organized in 1906.
Prosperityreal, sustained, and widely sharedput much of the roar into the twenties.
The economy kicked off its war harness in 1919, faltered a few steps in the recession of 19201921, and then sprinted forward for nearly seven years.
Both the recent war and Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellons tax policies favored the rapid expansion of capital investment.
Ingenious machines, powered by relatively cheap energy from newly tapped oil fields, dramatically increased the productivity of the laborer.
Assembly-line production reached such perfection in Henry Fords famed Rouge River plant near Detroit that a finished automobile emerged every ten seconds.
Great new industries suddenly sprouted forth.
Supplying electrical power for the humming new machines became a giant business in the 1920s.
Above all, the automobile, once the horseless chariot of the rich, now became the carriage of the common citizen.
By 1930 Americans owned almost 30 million cars.
The nations deepening love affair with the automobile headlined a momentous shift in the character of the economy.
American manufacturers seemed to have mastered the problems of production; their worries now focused on consumption.
Could they find the mass markets for the goods they had contrived to spew forth in such profusion?
Responding to this need, a new arm of American commerce came into being: advertising.
By persuasion and ploy, seduction and sexual suggestion, advertisers sought to make Americans chronically C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 *The Tennessee law was not formally repealed until 1967. discontented with their paltry possessions and want more, more, more.
A founder of this new profession was Bruce Barton, prominent New York partner in a Madison Avenue firm.
In 1925 Barton published a best-seller,  setting forth the provocative thesis that Jesus Christ was the greatest adman of all time.
Every advertising man ought to study the parables of Jesus, Barton preached.
They are marvelously condensed, as all good advertising should be.
Barton even had a good word to say for Christs executive ability: He picked up twelve men from the bottom ranks of business and forged them into an organization that conquered the world.
Sports became big business in the consumer economy of the 1920s.
Ballyhooed by the image makers, home-run heroes like George H.
(Babe) Ruth were far better known than most statesmen.
The fans bought tickets in such numbers that Babes hometown park, Yankee Stadium, became known as the house that Ruth built.
In 1921 the slugging heavyweight champion, Jack Dempsey, knocked out the dapper French light heavyweight, Georges Carpentier.
The Jersey City crowd in attendance had paid more than a million dollarsthe first in a series of million-dollar gates in the golden 1920s.
Buying on credit was another innovative feature of the postwar economy.
Possess today and pay tomorrow was the message directed at buyers.
Once-frugal descendants of Puritans went ever deeper into debt to own all kinds of newfangled marvelsrefrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and especially cars and radiosnow.
Prosperity thus accumulated an overhanging cloud of debt, and the economy became increasingly vulnerable to disruptions of the credit structure.
A new industrial revolution slipped into high gear in America in the 1920s.
Thrusting out steel tentacles, it changed the daily life of the people in unprecedented ways.
Machinery was the new messiahand the automobile was its principal prophet.
Of all the inventions of the era, the automobile cut the deepest mark.
It heralded an amazing new industrial system based on assembly-line methods and mass-production techniques.
Americans adapted rather than invented the gasoline engine; Europeans can claim the original honor.
By the 1890s a few daring American inventors and promoters, including Henry Ford and Ransom E. Olds (Oldsmobile), were developing the infant automotive industry.
By 1910 sixty-nine car companies rolled out a total annual production of 181,000 units.
The early contraptions were neither speedy nor reliable.
Many a stalled motorist, profanely cranking a balky automobile, had to endure the jeer Get a horse from the occupants of a passing dobbin-drawn carriage.
An enormous industry sprang into being, as Detroit became the motorcar capital of America.
The mechanized colossus owed much to the stopwatch efficiency techniques of Frederick W. Taylor, a prominent inventor, engineer, and tennis player, who sought to eliminate wasted motion.
His epitaph reads Father of Scientific Management.
Best known of the new crop of industrial wizards was Henry Ford, who more than any other individual put America on rubber tires.
His high and hideous Model T (Tin Lizzie) was cheap, rugged, and reasonably reliable, though rough and clattering.
The parts of Fords flivver were highly standardized, but the behavior of this rattling good car was so eccentric that it became the butt of numberless jokes.
Lean and silent Henry Ford, who was said to have wheels in his head, erected an immense personal empire on the cornerstone of his mechanical genius, though his associates provided much of the organizational talent.
Ill educated, this multimillionaire mechanic was socially and culturally narrow; History is bunk, he once testified.
But he dedicated himself with one-track devotion to the gospel of standardization.
After two early failures, he grasped and applied fully the techniques of assembly-line productionFordism.
He is supposed to have remarked that the purchaser could have his automobile any color he desiredjust as long as it was black.
So economical were his methods that in the mid-1920s he was selling the Ford roadster for $260well within the purse of a thrifty worker.
The flood of Fords was phenomenal.
In 1914 the Automobile Wizard turned out his 500,000th Model T. By 1930 his total had risen to 20 million, or, on a bumper-to-bumper basis, more than enough to encircle the globe.
A national newspaper and magazine poll conducted in 1923 revealed Ford to be the peoples choice for the presidential nomination in 1924.
By 1929, when the great bull market collapsed, 26 million motor vehicles were registered in the United States.
This figure, averaging 1 for every 4.9 Americans, represented far more automobiles than existed in all the rest of the world.
The impact of the self-propelled carriage on various aspects of American life was tremendous.
A gigantic new industry emerged, dependent on steel but disC HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 1908 (Model T  introduced) 1914 1920 1924 Months 20 15 10 5 0 The Cost of a Model T Ford, 19081924 Henry Fords mass-production techniques cut the costs of production dramatically and put the automobile within reach of the workingpersons purse.
(Cost is shown in months of labor for an employee at the average national wage.
) placing steel from its kingpin role.
Employing directly or indirectly about 6 million people by 1930, it was a major wellspring of the nations prosperity.
Thousands of new jobs, moreover, were created by supporting industries.
The lengthening list would include rubber, glass, and fabrics, to say nothing of highway construction and thousands of service stations and garages.
Americas standard of living, responding to this infectious vitality, rose to an enviable level.
New industries boomed lustily; older ones grew sickly.
The petroleum business experienced an explosive development.
Hundreds of oil derricks shot up in California, Texas, and Oklahoma, as these states expanded wondrously and the wilderness frontier became an industrial frontier.
The oncefeared railroad octopus, on the other hand, was hard hit by the competition of passenger cars, buses, and trucks.
An age-old story was repeated: one industrys gains were another industrys pains.
Other effects were widely felt.
Speedy marketing of perishable foodstuffs, such as fresh fruits, was accelerated.
A new prosperity enriched outlying farms, as city dwellers were provided with produce at attractive prices.
Countless new roads ribboned out to meet the demand of the American motorist for smoother and faster highways, often paid for by taxes on gasoline.
The era of mud ended as the nation made haste to construct the finest network of hard-surfaced roadways in the world.
Lured by sophisicated advertising, and encouraged by tempting installment-plan buying, countless Americans with shallow purses acquired the habit of riding as they paid.
Zooming motorcars were agents of social change.
At first a luxury, they rapidly became a necessity.
Essentially devices for needed transportation, they soon developed into a badge of freedom and equalitya necessary prop for self-respect.
To some, ostentation seemed more important than Why on earth do you need to study whats changing this country?
I can tell you whats happening in just four letters: A-U-T-O!
transportation.
Leisure hours could now be spent more pleasurably, as tens of thousands of cooped-up souls responded to the call of the open road on joyriding vacations.
Women were further freed from clinging-vine dependence on men.
Isolation among the sections was broken down, and the less attractive states lost population at an alarming rate.
By the late 1920s, Americans owned more automobiles than bathtubs.
I cant go to town in a bathtub, one homemaker explained.
Other social by-products of the automobile were visible.
Autobuses made possible the consolidation of schools and to some extent of churches.
The sprawling suburbs spread out still farther  from the urban core, as America became a nation of commuters.
The demon machine, on the other hand, exacted a terrible toll by catering to the American mania for speed.
Citizens were becoming statistics.
Not counting the hundreds of thousands of injured and crippled, the one millionth American had died in a motor vehicle accident by 1951more than all those killed on all the battlefields of all the nations wars to that date.
The public be rammed seemed to be the motto of the new age.
Virtuous home life partially broke down as joyriders of all ages forsook the parlor for the highway.
The morals of flaming youth sagged correspondinglyat least in the judgment of their elders.
What might young people get up to in the privacy of a closed-top Model T?
An Indiana juvenile court judge voiced parents worst fears when he condemned the automobile as a house of prostitution on wheels.
Even the celebrated crime waves of the 1920s and 1930s were aided and abetted by the motorcar, for gangsters could now make quick getaways.
Yet no sane American would plead for a return of the old horse and buggy, complete with flybreeding manure.
The automobile contributed notably to improved air and environmental quality, despite its later notoriety as a polluter.
Life might be cut short on the highways, and smog might poison the air, but the automobile brought more convenience, pleasure, and excitement into more peoples lives than almost any other single invention.
Gasoline engines also provided the power that enabled humans to fulfill the age-old dream of sprouting wings.
After near-successful experiments by others with heavier-than-air craft, the Wright brothers, Orville and Wilbur, performed the miracle at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
On a historic dayDecember 17, 1903Orville Wright took aloft a feebly engined plane that stayed airborne for 12 seconds and 120 feet.
Thus the air age was launched by two obscure bicycle repairmen.
As aviation gradually got off the ground, the world slowly shrank.
The public was made increasC HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 ingly air-minded by unsung heroesoften martyrswho appeared as stunt fliers at fairs and other public gatherings.
Airplanesflying coffinswere used with marked success for various purposes during the Great War of 19141918.
Shortly thereafter private companies began to operate passenger lines with airmail contracts, which were in effect a subsidy from Washington.
The first transcontinental airmail route was established from New York to San Francisco in 1920.
In 1927 modest and skillful Charles A. Lindbergh, the so-called Flyin Fool, electrified the world by the first solo west-to-east conquest of the Atlantic.
Seeking a prize of $25,000, the lanky stunt flier courageously piloted his single-engine plane, the   grueling thirty-three hours and thirty-nine minutes.
Lindberghs exploit swept Americans off their feet.
Fed up with the cynicism and debunking of the jazz age, they found in this wholesome and handsome youth a genuine hero.
They clasped the soaring Lone Eagle to their hearts much more warmly than the bashful young man desired.
Lucky Lindy received an uproarious welcome in the hero canyon of lower Broadway, as eighteen hundred tons of ticker tape and other improvised confetti showered upon him.
Lindberghs achievementit was more than a stuntdid much to dramatize and popularize flying, while giving a strong boost to the infant aviation industry.
The impact of the airship was tremendous.
It provided the restless American spirit with yet another dimension.
At the same time, it gave birth to a giant new industry.
Unfortunately, the accident rate in the pioneer stages of aviation was high, though hardly more so than on the early railroads.
But by the 1930s and 1940s, travel by air on regularly scheduled airlines was significantly safer than on many overcrowded highways.
Humanitys new wings also increased the tempo of an already breathless civilization.
The floundering railroad received another setback through the loss of passengers and mail.
A lethal new weapon was given to the gods of war, and with the coming of city-busting aerial bombs, people could well debate whether the conquest of the air was a blessing or a curse.
The Atlantic Ocean was shriveling to about the size of the Aegean Sea in the days of Socrates, while isolation behind ocean moats was becoming a bygone dream.
The speed of the airplane was far eclipsed by the speed of radio waves.
Guglielmo Marconi, an Italian, invented wireless telegraphy in the 1890s, and his brainchild was used for long-range communication during World War I. Next came the voice-carrying radio, a triumph of many minds.
A red-letter day was posted in November 1920, when the Pittsburgh radio station KDKA broadcast the news of the Harding landslide.
Later miracles were achieved in transatlantic wireless phonographs, radiotelephones, and television.
The earliest radio programs reached only local audiences.
But by the late 1920s, technological improvements made long-distance broadcasting possible, and national commercial networks drowned out much local programming.
Meanwhile, advertising commercials made radio another vehicle for American free enterprise, as contrasted with the government-owned systems of Europe.
While other marvels of the eralike the automobilewere luring Americans away from home, the radio was drawing them back.
For much of the decade, family and neighbors gathered around a households sole radio as they once had around the toasty hearth.
Radio knitted the nation together.
Various regions heard voices with standardized accents, and countless millions tuned in to perennial comedy favorites like Amos n Andy.
Programs sponsored by manufacturers and distributors of brand-name products, like the A&P Gypsies and the Eveready Hour, helped to make radio-touted labels household words and purchases.
Educationally and culturally, the radio made a significant contribution.
Sports were further stimulated.
Politicians had to adjust their speaking techniques to the new medium, and millions rather than thousands of voters heard their promises and pleas.
A host of listeners swallowed the gospel of their favorite newscaster or were even ringside participants in world-shaking events.
Finally, the music of famous artists and symphony orchestras was beamed into countless homes.
The flickering movie was the fruit of numerous geniuses, including Thomas A. Edison.
As early as the 1890s, this novel contraption, though still in crude form, had attained some popularity in the naughty peep-show penny arcades.
The real birth of the movie came in 1903, when the first story sequence reached the screen.
This breathless melodrama,  five-cent theaters, popularly called nickelodeons.
Spectacular among the first full-length classics was D. W. Griffiths  glorified the Ku Klux Klan of Reconstruction days and defamed both blacks and Northern carpetbaggers.
White southerners would fire guns at the screen during the attempted rape scene.
A fascinating industry was thus launched.
Hollywood, in southern California, quickly became the movie capital of the world, for it enjoyed a maximum of sunshine and other advantages.
Early producers featured nudity and heavy-lidded female vampires (vamps), and an outraged public forced the screen magnates to set up their own rigorous C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 There is radio music in the air, every night, everywhere.
Anybody can hear it at home on a receiving set, which any boy can put up in an hour.
code of censorship.
The motion picture really arrived during the World War of 19141918, when it was used as an engine of anti-German propaganda.
Specially prepared hang the kaiser films aided powerfully in selling war bonds and in boosting morale.
A new era began in 1927 with the success of the first talkie former Al Jolson in blackface.
The age of the silents was ushered out as theaters everywhere were wired for sound.
At about the same time,  reasonably satisfactory color films were being  produced.
Movies eclipsed all other new forms of amusement in the phenomenal growth of their popularity.
Movie stars of the first pulchritude commanded much larger salaries than the president of the United States, in some cases as much as $100,000 for a single picture.
Many actors and actresses were far more widely known than the nations political leaders.
Critics bemoaned the vulgarization of popular tastes wrought by the new technologies of radio and motion pictures.
But the effects of the new mass media were not all negative.
The parochialism of insular ethnic communities eroded as the immigrants children, especially, forsook the neighborhood vaudeville theater for the downtown movie palace or turned away from Grandmas Yiddish  storytelling to tune in Amos n Andy.
Much of the rich diversity of the immigrants Old Country cultures was lost, but the standardization of tastes and of language hastened entry into the American mainstreamand set the stage for the emergence of a working-class political coalition that, for a time, would overcome the divisive ethnic differences of the past.
Far-reaching changes in lifestyles and values paralleled the dramatic upsurge of the economy.
The census of 1920 revealed that for the first time most Americans no longer lived in the countryside but in urban areas.
Women continued to find opportunities for employment in the cities, though they tended to cluster in a few low-paying jobs (such as retail clerking and office typing) that became classified as womens work.
An organized birth-control movement, led by fiery feminist Margaret Sanger, openly championed the use of contraceptives.
Alice Pauls National Womans party began in 1923 to campaign for an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution.
(The campaign was still stalled short of success seven decades later.
) To some defenders of traditional ways, it seemed that the world had suddenly gone mad.
Even the churches were affected.
The Fundamentalist champions of the old-time religion lost ground to the Modernists, who liked to think that God was a good guy and the universe a pretty chummy place.
Some churches tried to fight the Devil with worldly weapons.
Competing with joyriding automobiles and golf links, they turned to quality entertainment of their own, including wholesome moving pictures for young people.
One uptown house of the Lord in New York advertised on a billboard, Come to Church: Christian Worship Increases Your Efficiency.
Even before the war, one observer thought the chimes had struck sex oclock in America, and the 1920s witnessed what many old-timers regarded as a veritable erotic eruption.
Advertisers exploited sexual allure to sell everything from soap to car tires.
Once-modest maidens now proclaimed their new freedom as flappers in bobbed tresses and dresses.
Young women appeared with hemlines elevated, stockings rolled, breasts taped flat, cheeks rouged, This industry must have toward that sacred thing, the mind of a child, toward that clean virgin thing, that unmarked slate, the same responsibility, the same care about the impressions made upon it, that the best clergyman or the most inspired teacher of youth would have.
and lips a crimson gash that held a dangling cigarette.
Thus did the flapper symbolize a yearnedfor and devil-may-care independence (some said wild abandon) in some American women.
Still more adventuresome females shocked their elders when they sported the new one-piece bathing suits.
Justification for this new sexual frankness could be found in the recently translated writings of Dr.
Sigmund Freud.
This Viennese physician appeared to argue that sexual repression was responsible for a variety of nervous and emotional ills.
Thus not pleasure alone, but health, demanded sexual gratification and liberation.
Many taboos flew out the window as sexconscious Americans let themselves go.
As unknowing Freudians, teenagers pioneered the sexual frontiers.
Glued together in rhythmic embrace, they danced to jazz music squeaking from phonographs.
In an earlier day a kiss had been the equivalent of  a proposal of marriage.
But in the new era, exploratory young folk sat in darkened movie houses or took to the highways and byways in automobiles.
There the youthful neckers and petters poached upon the forbidden territory of each others bodies.
If the flapper was the goddess of the era of wonderful nonsense, jazz was its sacred music.
With its virtuoso wanderings and tricky syncopation, jazz moved up from New Orleans along with the migrating blacks during World War I. Tunes like W. C. Handys St.
Louis Blues became instant  classics, as the wailing saxophone became the trumpet of the new era.
Blacks such as Handy, Jelly Roll Morton, and Joseph (Joe) King Oliver gave C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 feature-length talkie, a motion picture in which the characters actually speak, and its arrival spelled the end for silent films, where the audience read subtitles with live or recorded music as background.
Although moviegoers flocked to  hear recorded sound, when they got there they found a movie concerned with themes of great interest to the urban, firstor second-generation immigrant audiences who were Hollywoods major patrons.
assimilating Jewish immigrant torn between following his fathers wish that he train as an Orthodox cantor and his own ambition to make a success for himself as a jazz singer, performing in the popular blackface style.
The movies star, Al Jolson, was himself an immigrant Jew who had made his name as a blackface performer.
White actors had gradually taken over the southern black minstrel show during the nineteenth century.
By the early twentieth century, Jewish entertainers had entirely monopolized these roles.
Jolson, like other Jewish blackface performers, used his ability to impersonate a black person to force his acceptance into mainstream white American society.
This use of blackface seems ironic since black Americans in the 1920s were struggling with their own real-life battles against Jim Crowera segregation, a blatant form of exclusion from American society.
Besides the novelty of being a talkie, what may have made  in 1927?
How might different types of viewers in the audience have responded to the story?
What does the popularity of blackface reveal about racial attitudes at the time?
birth to jazz, but the entertainment industry soon spawned all-white bandsnotably Paul Whitemans.
Caucasian impresarios cornered the profits, though not the creative soul, of Americas most native music.
A new racial pride also blossomed in the northern black communities that burgeoned during and after the war.
Harlem in New York City, counting some 100,000 African-American residents in the 1920s, was one of the largest black communities in the world.
Harlem sustained a vibrant, creative culture that nourished poets like Langston Hughes, whose first volume of verses,  appeared in 1926.
Harlem in the 1920s also spawned a charismatic political leader, Marcus Garvey.
The Jamaican-born Garvey founded the United Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) to promote the resettlement of American blacks in their own African homeland.
Within the United States, the UNIA sponsored stores and other businesses, like the Black Star Line Steamship Company, to keep blacks dollars in black pockets.
Most of Garveys enterprises failed financially, and Garvey himself was convicted in 1927 for alleged mail fraud and deported by a nervous U.S.
government.
But the race pride that Garvey inspired among the 4 million blacks who counted themselves UNIA followers at the movements height helped these newcomers  to northern cities gain self-confidence and selfreliance.
And his example proved important to the later founding of the Nation of Islam (Black Muslim) movement.
C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 Likewise in literature, an older era seemed to have ground to a halt with the recent war.
By the dawn of the 1920s, most of the custodians of an aging genteel culture had diedHenry James in 1916, Henry Adams in 1918, and William Dean Howells (the Dean of American literature) in 1920.
A few novelists who had been popular in the previous decades continued to thrive, notably the well-to-do, cosmopolitan New Yorker Edith Wharton and the  Virginia-born Willa Cather, esteemed for her stark but sympathetic portrayals of pioneering on the prairies.
But in the decade after the war, a new generation of writers burst upon the scene.
Many of them hailed from ethnic and regional backgrounds different from that of the Protestant New Englanders who traditionally had dominated American cultural life.
The newcomers exhibited the energy of youth, the ambition of excluded outsiders, and in many cases the smoldering resentment of ideals betrayed.
They bestowed on American literature a new vitality, imaginativeness, and artistic quality.
A patron saint of many young authors was H. L. Mencken, the Bad Boy of Baltimore.
Little escaped his acidic wit.
In the pages of his green-covered monthly   rapier as much as a pen.
He assailed marriage, patriotism, democracy, prohibition, Rotarians, and the middle-class American booboisie.
The South he contemptuously dismissed as the Sahara of the Bozart (a bastardization of  for the fine arts), and he scathingly attacked dogooders as Puritans.
Puritanism, he jibed, was the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, might be happy.
The war had jolted many young writers out of their complacency about traditional values and literary standards.
With their pens they probed for new codes of morals and understanding, as well as fresh forms of expression.
F. Scott Fitzgerald, a handsome Minnesota-born Princetonian then only twenty-four years old, became an overnight celebrity when he published  1920.
The book became a kind of Bible for the young.
It was eagerly devoured by aspiring flappers and their ardent wooers, many of whom affected an air of bewildered abandon toward life.
Catching the I was always embarrassed by the words sacred, glorious, and sacrifice and the expression in vain.
There were many words that you could not stand to hear and finally only the names of places had dignity.
Certain numbers were the same way and certain dates and these with the names of the places were all you could say and have them mean anything.
Abstract words such as glory, honor, courage, or hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of villages, the numbers of roads, the names of rivers, the numbers of regiments, and the dates.
spirit of the hour (often about 4  A .
), Fitzgerald found all gods dead, all wars fought, all faiths in man shaken.
He followed this melancholy success with   of the glamour and cruelty of an achievementoriented society.
Theodore Dreisers masterpiece of 1925 explored much the same theme:  ing girl by her socially ambitious young lover.
Ernest Hemingway, who had seen action on the Italian front in 1917, was among the writers most affected by the war.
He responded to pernicious propaganda and the overblown appeal to patriotism by devising his own lean, word-sparing but wordperfect style.
In  disillusioned, spiritually numb American expatriates in Europe.
In  crafted one of the finest novels in any language about the war experience.
A troubled soul, he finally blew out his brains with a shotgun blast in 1961.
Other writers turned to a caustic probing of American small-town life.
Sherwood Anderson dissected various fictional personalities in  by their cramped psychological surroundings.
Sinclair Lewis, a hotheaded, heavy-drinking journalist from Sauk Centre, Minnesota, sprang into prominence in 1920 with  womans unsuccessful war against provincialism.
In  F. Babbitt, a prosperous, vulgar, middle-class  real estate broker who slavishly conforms to the respectable materialism of his group.
The word  familiar lifestyle.
William Faulkner, a dark-eyed, pensive Mississippian, penned a bitter war novel,  1926.
He then turned his attention to a fictional chronicle of an imaginary, history-rich Deep South county.
In powerful books like  peeled back layers of time and consciousness  from the constricted souls of his ingrown southern characters.
Nowhere was innovation in the 1920s more obvious than in poetry.
Ezra Pound, a brilliantly erratic Idahoan who deserted America for Europe, rejected what he called an old bitch civilization, gone in the teeth and proclaimed his doctrine: Make It New.
Pound strongly influenced the Missouri-born and Harvard-educated T. S. Eliot, who took up residence in England.
In The Waste Land (1922), Eliot produced one of the most impenetrable but influential poems of the century.
Robert Frost, a San Franciscoborn poet, wrote hauntingly about his adopted New England.
The most daringly innovative of all was e.e.
cummings, who relied on unorthodox diction and peculiar typesetting to produce startling poetical effects.
On the stage, Eugene ONeill, a New York dramatist and Princeton dropout of globe-trotting background, laid bare Freudian notions of sex in plays like  playwright, he authored more than a dozen productions in the 1920s and won the Nobel Prize in 1936.
ONeill arose from New Yorks Greenwich Village, which before and after the war was a seething cauldron of writers, painters, musicians, actors, and other would-be artists.
After the war a black cultural renaissance also took root uptown in Harlem, led  by such gifted writers as Claude McKay, Langston Hughes, and Zora Neale Hurston, and by jazz artists like Louis Armstrong and Eubie Blake.
In an outpouring of creative expression called the Harlem Renaissance, they proudly exulted in their black culture and argued for a New Negro who was a full citizen and a social equal to whites.
Architecture also married itself to the new materialism and functionalism.
Long-range city planning was being intelligently projected, and C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 *From  by the Estate of Langston Hughes.
Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Strange, That in this nigger place I should meet life face to face; When, for years, I had been seeking Life in places gentler-speaking, Until I came to this vile street And found Life stepping on my feet!
* architects like Frank Lloyd Wright were advancing the theory that buildings should grow from their sites and not slavishly imitate Greek and Roman importations.
The machine age outdid itself in New York City when it thrust upward the cloud-brushing Empire State Building, 102 stories high.
Dedicated in 1931, the Empty State Building towered partially vacant during the depressed 1930s.
Signals abounded that the economic joyride might end in a crash; even in the best years of the 1920s, several hundred banks failed annually.
This something-for-nothing craze was well illustrated by real estate speculation, especially the fantastic Florida boom that culminated in 1925.
Numerous underwater lots were sold to eager purchasers for preposterous sums.
The whole wildcat scheme collapsed when the peninsula was devastated by a West Indian hurricane, which belied advertisements of a soothing tropical wind.
The stock exchange provided even greater sensations.
Speculation ran wild, and an orgy of boomor-bust trading pushed the market up to dizzy peaks.
Never sell America short and Be a bull on America were favorite catchwords, as Wall Street bulls gored one another and fleeced greedy lambs.
The stock market became a veritable gambling den.
As the 1920s lurched forward, everybody seemed to be buying stocks on marginthat is, with a small down payment.
Barbers, stenographers, and elevator operators cashed in on hot tips picked up while on duty.
One valet was reported to have parlayed his wages into a quarter of a million dollars.
The cash register crashed the social register, as rags-to-riches Americans reverently worshiped at the altar of the ticker-tape machine.
So powerful was the intoxicant of quick profits that few heeded the voices raised in certain quarters to warn that this kind of tinsel prosperity could not last forever.
Little was done by Washington to curb moneymad speculators.
In the wartime days of Wilson, the national debt had rocketed from the 1914 figure of $1,188,235,400 to the 1921 peak of $23,976,250,608.
Conservative principles of money management pointed to a diversion of surplus funds to reduce this financial burden.
A businesslike move toward economic sanity was made in 1921, when a Republican Congress created the Bureau of the Budget.
The bureaus director was to assist the president in preparing careful estimates of receipts and expenditures for submission to Congress as the annual budget.
This new reform, long overdue, was designed in part to prevent haphazardly extravagant appropriations.
The burdensome taxes inherited from the war were especially distasteful to Secretary of the Treasury Mellon, as well as to his fellow millionaires.
Their theory was that such high levies forced the rich to invest in tax-exempt securities rather than  in the factories that provided prosperous payrolls.
The Mellonites also argued, with considerable persuasiveness, that high taxes not only discouraged business but, in so doing, also brought a smaller net return to the Treasury than moderate taxes.
Seeking to succor the poor rich people, Mellon helped engineer a series of tax reductions from 1921 to 1926.
Congress followed his lead by repealing the excess-profits tax, abolishing the gift tax, and reducing excise taxes, the surtax, the income tax, and estate taxes.
In 1921 a wealthy person with an income of $1 million had paid $663,000 in income taxes; in 1926 the same person paid about $200,000.
Secretary Mellons spare-the-rich policies thus shifted much of the tax burden from the wealthy to the middle-income groups.
Mellon, lionized by conservatives as the greatest secretary of the Treasury since Hamilton, remains a controversial figure.
True, he reduced the national debt by $10 billionfrom about $26 billion to $16 billion.
But foes of the emaciated multimillionaire charged that he should have bitten an even larger chunk out of the debt, especially while the country was pulsating with prosperity.
He was also accused of indirectly encouraging the bull market.
If he had absorbed more of the national income in taxes, there would have been less money left for frenzied speculation.
His refusal to do so typified the single-mindedly probusiness regime that dominated the political scene throughout the postwar decade.
C HAPTER 32 American Life in theRoaring Twenties, 19191929 Wright brothers fly the first airplane First story-sequence motion picture Eighteenth Amendment (prohibition) ratified Volstead Act Seattle general strike Anderson publishes  Red scare Radio broadcasting begins Fitzgerald publishes  Lewis publishes  Sacco-Vanzetti trial Emergency Quota Act of 1921 Bureau of the Budget created Lewis publishes  Eliot publishes The Waste Land Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) proposed Immigration Act of 1924 Scopes trial Florida real estate boom Fitzgerald publishes  Dreiser publishes  Hughes publishes  Hemingway publishes  Lindbergh flies the Atlantic solo First talking motion pictures Sacco and Vanzetti executed Faulkner publishes  Hemingway publishes  For further reading, see page A22 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Politics of Boom and Bust  19201932 H ERBERT H OOVER , 1928 T hree Republican presidentsWarren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover steered the nation on the roller-coaster ride of the 1920s, a thrilling ascent from the depths of post World War I recession to breathtaking heights of prosperity, followed by a terrifying crash into the Great Depression.
In a retreat from progressive reform, Republicans sought to serve the public good less by direct government action and more through cooperation with big business.
Some corrupt officials served themselves as well, exploiting public resources for personal profit.
Meanwhile, the United States retreated from its brief internationalist fling during World War I and resumed with a vengeance its traditional foreign policy of military unpreparedness and political isolationism.
Warren G. Harding, inaugurated in 1921,  presidential.
With erect figure, broad shoulders, high forehead, bushy eyebrows, and graying hair, he was one of the best-liked men of his generation.
An easygoing, warm-handed backslapper, he exuded graciousness and love of people.
So kindly was his nature that he would brush off ants rather than crush them.
Yet the charming, smiling exterior concealed a weak, inept interior.
With a mediocre mind, Harding quickly found himself beyond his depth in the presidency.
God!
What a job!
was his anguished cry on one occasion.
Harding, like Grant, was unable to detect moral halitosis in his evil associates, and he was soon surrounded by his poker-playing, shirt-sleeved cronies of the Ohio Gang.
A good guy, Harding was one of the boys.
He hated to hurt peoples feelings, especially those of his friends, by saying no, and designing political leeches capitalized on this weakness.
The difference between George Washington and Warren Harding, ran a current quip, was that while Washington could not tell a lie, Harding could not tell a liar.
He was not a bad man, said one Washington observer.
He was just a slob.
Candidate Harding, who admitted his scanty mental furnishings, had promised to gather about him the best minds of the party.
Charles Evans Hughesmasterful, imperious, incisive, brilliant brought to the position of secretary of state a dominating if somewhat conservative leadership.
The new secretary of the Treasury was a lean and elderly Pittsburgh aluminum king, Andrew W. Mellon, multimillionaire collector of the paintings that are now displayed in Washington as his gift to the nation.
Chubby-faced Herbert Hoover, famed feeder of the Belgians and wartime food administrator, became secretary of commerce.
An energetic businessman and engineer, he raised his second-rate cabinet post to first-rate importance, especially in drumming up foreign trade for U.S.
manufacturers.
But the best minds of the cabinet were largely offset by two of the worst.
Senator Albert B. Fall of New Mexico, a scheming anticonservationist, was appointed secretary of the interior.
As guardian of the nations natural resources, he resembled the wolf hired to protect the sheep.
Harry M. Daugherty, a small-town lawyer but a big-time crook in the Ohio Gang, was supposed to prosecute wrongdoers as attorney general.
Well intentioned but weak-willed, Harding was a perfect front for enterprising industrialists.
A McKinley-style old order settled back into place with a heavy thud at wars end, crushing the reform seedlings that had sprouted in the progressive era.
A nest-feathering crowd moved into Washington and proceeded to hoodwink Harding, whom many regarded as an amiable boob.
This new Old Guard hoped to improve on the old business doctrine of laissez-faire.
Their plea was not simply for government to keep hands off business, but for government to help guide business along the path to profits.
They subtly and effectively achieved their ends by putting the courts and the administrative bureaus into the safekeeping of fellow stand-patters for the duration of the decade.
The Supreme Court was a striking example of this trend.
Harding lived less than three years as president, but he appointed four of the nine justices.
Several of his choices were or became deepdyed reactionaries, and they buttressed the dike against popular currents for nearly two decades.
Hardings fortunate choice for chief justice was expresident Taft, who not only performed his duties C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 ably but surprisingly was more liberal than some of his cautious associates.
In the first years of the 1920s, the Supreme Court axed progressive legislation.
It killed a federal child-labor law, stripped away many of labors hardwon gains, and rigidly restricted government intervention in the economy.
In the landmark case of reversed its own reasoning in  (see p.
670672), which had declared women to be deserving of special protection in the workplace, and invalidated a minimum-wage law for women.
Its strained ruling was that because women now had the vote (Nineteenth Amendment), they were the legal equals of men and could no longer be protected by special legislation.
The contradictory premises of the  debate over gender differences that would continue for the rest of the century: were women sufficiently different from men that they merited special legal and social treatment, or were they effectively equal in the eyes of the law and therefore undeserving of special protections and preferences?
(An analogous debate over  action policies later in the century.
) Corporations, under Harding, could once more relax and expand.
Antitrust laws were often ignored, circumvented, or feebly enforced by friendly prosecutors in the attorney generals office.
The Interstate Commerce Commission, to single out one agency, came to be dominated by men who were personally sympathetic to the managers of the railroads.
Harding reactionaries might well have boasted, We care not what laws the Democrats pass as long as we are permitted to administer them.
Big industrialists, striving to reduce the rigors of competition, now had a free hand to set up trade associations.
Cement manufacturers, for example, would use these agencies to agree upon standardization of product, publicity campaigns, and a united front in dealing with the railroads and labor.
Although many of these associations ran counter to the spirit of existing antitrust legislation, their formation was encouraged by Secretary Hoover.
His sense of engineering efficiency led him to condemn the waste resulting from cutthroat competition, and his commitment to voluntary cooperation led him to urge businesses to regulate themselves rather than be regulated by big government.
Wartime government controls on the economy were swiftly dismantled.
The War Industries Board disappeared with almost indecent haste.
With its passing, progressive hopes for more government regulation of big business evaporated.
Washington likewise returned the railroads to private management in 1920.
Reformers had hoped that wartime government operation of the lines might lead to their permanent nationalization.
Instead Congress passed the Esch-Cummins Transportation Act of 1920, which encouraged private consolidation of the railroads and pledged the Interstate Commerce Commission to guarantee their profitability.
The new philosophy was not to save the country from the railroads, as in the days of the Populists, but to save the railroads for the country.
The federal government also tried to pull up anchor and get out of the shipping business.
The Merchant Marine Act of 1920 authorized the Shipping Board, which controlled about fifteen hundred vessels, to dispose of much of the hastily built wartime fleet at bargain-basement prices.
The board operated the remaining vessels without conspicuous success.
Under the La Follette Seamans Act of 1915, American shipping could not thrive in competition with foreigners, who all too often provided their crews with wretched food and starvation wages.
Labor, suddenly deprived of its wartime crutch of friendly government support, limped along badly in the postwar decade.
A bloody strike in the steel industry was ruthlessly broken in 1919, partly by exploiting ethnic and racial divisions among the steelworkers and partly by branding the strikers as dangerous reds.
The Railway Labor Board, a successor body to the wartime labor boards, ordered a It would need more than the Nineteenth Amendment to convince me that there are no differences between men and women, or that legislation cannot take those differences into account.
wage cut of 12 percent in 1922, provoking a twomonth strike.
It ended when Attorney General Daugherty, who fully shared Hardings big-business bias, clamped on the strikers one of the most sweeping injunctions in American history.
Unions wilted in this hostile political environment, and membership shriveled by nearly 30 percent between 1920 and 1930.
Needy veterans were among the few nonbusiness groups to reap lasting gains from the war.
Congress in 1921 generously created the Veterans Bureau, authorized to operate hospitals and provide vocational rehabilitation for the disabled.
Veterans quickly organized into pressure groups.
The American Legion had been founded in Paris in 1919 by Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.
Legionnaires met periodically to renew old hardships and let off steam in good-natured horseplay.
The legion soon became distinguished for its militant patriotism, rock-ribbed conservatism, and zealous antiradicalism.
The legion also became notorious for its aggressive lobbying for veterans benefits.
The chief  grievance of the former doughboys was monetarythey wanted their dough.
The former  servicemen demanded adjusted compensation to make up for the wages they had lost when they turned in their factory overalls for military uniforms during the Great War.
Critics denounced this demand as a holdup bonus, but the millions of veterans deployed heavy political artillery.
They browbeat Congress into passing a bonus bill in 1922, which Harding promptly vetoed.
Re-forming their lines, the repulsed veterans gathered for a final attack.
In 1924 Congress again hoisted the white flag and passed the Adjusted Compensation Act.
It gave every former soldier a paid-up insurance policy due in twenty yearsadding about $3.5 billion to the total cost of the war.
Penny-pinching Calvin Coolidge sternly vetoed the measure, but Congress overrode him, leaving the veterans with their loot.
Making peace with the fallen foe was the most pressing problem left on Hardings doorstep.
The United States, having rejected the Treaty of Versailles, was still technically at war with Germany, Austria, and Hungary nearly three years after the armistice.
Peace was finally achieved by lone-wolf tactics.
In July 1921 Congress passed a simple joint resolution that declared the war officially ended.
Isolation was enthroned in Washington.
The Harding administration, with the Senate irreconcilables holding a hatchet over its head, continued to regard the League of Nations as a thing unclean.
Harding at first refused even to support the Leagues world health program.
But the new world body was much too important to be completely ignored.
Unofficial observers were sent to its seat in Geneva, Switzerland, to hang around like detectives shadowing a suspected criminal.
Harding could not completely turn his back on the outside world, especially the Middle East, where a sharp rivalry developed between America and Britain for oil-drilling concessions.
Remembering that the Allies had floated to victory on a flood of oil, experts recognized that liquid black gold would be as necessary as blood in the battles of tomorrow.
Secretary Hughes eventually secured for American C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 oil companies the right to share in the exploitation of the sandy regions oil riches.
Disarmament was one international issue on which Harding, after much indecision, finally seized the initiative.
He was prodded by businesspeople unwilling to dig deeper into their pockets for money to finance the ambitious naval building program started during the war.
A deadly contest was shaping up with Britain and Japan, which watched with alarm as the oceans filled with American vessels.
Britain still commanded the worlds largest navy,  but the clatter of American riveters proclaimed that the United States would soon overtake it.
Public agitation in America, fed by these worries, brought about the headline-making Washington Disarmament Conference in 19211922.
Invitations went to all the major naval powers except Bolshevik Russia, whose government the United States refused officially to recognize.
The double agenda included naval disarmament and the situation in the Far East.
At the outset Secretary Hughes startled the delegates, who were expecting the usual diplomatic fence-straddling, with a comprehensive, concrete plan for declaring a ten-year holiday on construction of battleships and even for scrapping some of the huge dreadnoughts already built.
He proposed that the scaled-down navies of America and Britain should enjoy parity in battleships and aircraft carriers, with Japan on the small end of a 5:5:3 ratio.
This arrangement sounded to the sensitive Japanese ambassador like Rolls-Royce, Rolls-Royce, Ford.
Complex bargaining followed in the wake of Hughess proposals.
The Five-Power Naval Treaty of 1922 embodied Hughess ideas on ship ratios, but only after face-saving compensation was offered to the insecure Japanese.
The British and Americans both conceded that they would refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, including the Philippines.
The Japanese were not subjected to such restraints in their possessions.
In addition, a Four-Power Treaty replaced the twenty-year-old Anglo-Japanese alliance.
The new pact bound Britain, Japan, France, and the United States to preserve the status quo in the Pacificanother concession to the jumpy Japanese.
Finally, the Washington Conference gave chaotic Chinathe Sick Man of the Far Easta shot in the arm with the NinePower Treaty of 1922, whose signatories agreed to nail wide open the Open Door in China.
When the final gavel banged, the Hardingites boasted with much fanfareand some justificationof their globe-shaking achievement in disarmament.
But their satisfaction was somewhat illusory.
No restrictions had been placed on small warships, and the other powers churned ahead  with the construction of cruisers, destroyers, and Battleships Battleship Tonnage Aircraft Carrier Tonnage           135,000           135,000    81,000 60,000 60,000 U.S.
Britain Japan France Italy 18 22 10 7 6                                             525,000                                             525,000                   315,000 175,000 175,000 Limits Imposed by Washington Conference, 19211922 The pledge of the British and Americans to refrain from fortifying their Far Eastern possessions, while Japan was allowed to fortify its possessions, was the key to the naval limitation treaty.
The United States and Great Britain thus won a temporary victory but later paid a horrendous price when they  had to dislodge the well-entrenched Japanese from the Pacific in World War II.
[The country is] more afraid of the tax collector than of any more distant foe.
submarines, while penny-pinching Uncle Sam lagged dangerously behind.
Congress also pointedly declared that it was making no commitment to the use of armed force or any kind of joint action when it ratified the Four-Power Treaty.
These reservations, in effect, rendered the treaty a dead letter.
Ominously, the American people seemed content to rely for their security on words and wishful thinking rather than on weapons and hardheaded realism.
A similar sentimentalism welled up later in the decade, when Americans clamored for the outlawry of war.
The conviction spread that if quarreling nations would only take the pledge to foreswear war as an instrument of national policy, swords could be beaten into plowshares.
Calvin Coolidges secretary of state, Frank B. Kellogg, who later won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role, was lukewarm about the idea.
But after petitions bearing more than 2 million signatures cascaded into Washington, he signed  with the French foreign minister in 1928 the famed Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Officially known as the Pact of Paris, it was ultimately ratified by sixty-two nations.
This new parchment peace was delusory in the extreme.
Defensive wars were still permitted, and what scheming aggressor could not cook up an excuse of self-defense?
Lacking both muscles and teeth, the pact was a diplomatic derelictand virtually useless in a showdown.
Yet it accuratelyand dangerouslyreflected the American mind in the 1920s, which was all too willing to be lulled into a false sense of security.
This mood took even deeper hold in the ostrichlike neutralism of the 1930s.
A comparable lack of realism afflicted foreign economic policy in the 1920s.
Businesspeople, shortsightedly obsessed with the dazzling prospects in the prosperous home market, sought to keep that market to themselves by flinging up insurmountable tariff walls around the United States.
They were spurred into action by their fear of a flood of cheap goods from recovering Europe, especially during the brief but sharp recession of 19201921.
In 1922 Congress passed the comprehensive Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law.
Glib lobbyists once more descended upon Washington and helped boost schedules from the average of 27 percent under Wilsons Underwood Tariff of 1913 to an average of 38.5 percent, which was almost as high as Tafts Payne-Aldrich Tariff of 1909.
(See the Appendix.
) Duties on farm produce were increased, and the principle was proclaimed that the general rates were designed to equalize the cost of American and foreign production.
A promising degree of flexibility was introduced for the first time, when the president was authorized, with the advice of the factfinding Tariff Commission, to reduce or increase duties by as much as 50 percent.
Presidents Harding and Coolidge, true to their big-industry sympathies, were far more friendly to tariff increases than to reductions.
In six years they authorized thirty-two upward changes, including on their list vital commodities like dairy products, chemicals, and pig iron.
During the same period, the White House ordered only five reductions.
These included mill feed and such trifling items as bobwhite quail, paintbrush handles, phenol, and cresylic acid.
The high-tariff course thus charted by the Republican regimes set off an ominous chain reaction.
European producers felt the squeeze, for the American tariff walls prolonged their postwar chaos.
An impoverished Europe needed to sell its manufactured goods to the United States, particularly if it hoped to achieve economic recovery and to pay its huge war debt to Washington.
America needed to give foreign nations a chance to make a profit from it so that they could buy its manufactured articles and repay debts.
International trade, Americans were slow to learn, is a twoway street.
In general, they could not sell to others in quantity unless they bought from them in quantity or lent them more U.S.
dollars.
Erecting tariff walls was a game that two could play.
The American example spurred European nations, throughout the feverish 1920s, to pile up higher barriers themselves.
These artificial obstacles were doubly bad: they hurt not only Americanmade goods but the products of European countries as well.
The whole vicious circle further deepened the international economic distress, providing one more rung on the ladder by which Adolf Hitler scrambled to power.
The loose morality and get-rich-quickism of the Harding era manifested themselves spectacularly in a series of scandals.
C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 Early in 1923 Colonel Charles R. Forbes, onetime deserter from the army, was caught with his hand in the till and resigned as head of the Veterans Bureau.
An appointee of the gullible Harding, he and his accomplices looted the government to the tune of about $200 million, chiefly in connection with the building of veterans hospitals.
He was sentenced to two years in a federal penitentiary.
Most shocking of all was the Teapot Dome scandal, an affair that involved priceless naval oil reserves at Teapot Dome (Wyoming) and Elk Hills (California).
In 1921 the slippery secretary of the interior, Albert B. Fall, induced his careless colleague, the secretary of the navy, to transfer these valuable properties to the Interior Department.
Harding indiscreetly signed the secret order.
Fall then quietly leased the lands to oilmen Harry F. Sinclair and Edward L. Doheny, but not until he had received a bribe (loan) of $100,000 from Doheny and about three times that amount in all from Sinclair.
Teapot Dome, no tempest in a teapot, finally came to a whistling boil.
Details of the crooked transaction gradually began to leak out in March 1923, two years after Harding took office.
Fall, Sinclair, and Doheny were indicted the next year, but the case dragged through the courts until 1929.
Finally Fall was found guilty of taking a bribe and was sentenced to one year in jail.
By a curious quirk of justice, the two bribe givers were acquitted while the bribe taker was convicted, although Sinclair served several months in jail for having shadowed jurors and for refusing to testify before a Senate committee.
The oily smudge from Teapot Dome polluted the prestige of the Washington government.
Rightthinking citizens wondered what was going on when public officials could sell out the nations vital resources, especially those reserved for the U.S.
Navy.
The acquittal of Sinclair and Doheny undermined faith in the courts, while giving further currency to the cynical sayings, You cant put a million dollars in jail and In America everyone is assumed guilty until proven rich.
Still more scandals erupted.
Persistent reports as to the underhanded doings of Attorney General Daugherty prompted a Senate investigation in 1924 of the illegal sale of pardons and liquor permits.
Forced to resign, the accused official was tried in 1927 but was released after a jury twice failed to agree.
During the trial Daugherty hid behind the trousers of the now-dead Harding by implying that persistent probing might uncover crookedness in the White House.
Harding was mercifully spared the full revelation of these iniquities, though his worst suspicions were aroused.
While news of the scandals was beginning to break, he embarked upon a speechmaking tour across the country all the way to Alaska.
On the return trip, he died in San Francisco, on August 2, 1923, of pneumonia and thrombosis.
His death may have been hastened by a broken heart resulting from the disloyalty of designing friends.
Mourning millions, not yet fully aware of the graft in Washington, expressed genuine sorrow.
The brutal fact is that Harding was not a strong enough man for the presidencyas he himself privately admitted.
Such was his weakness that he tolerated people and conditions that subjected the Republic to its worst disgrace since the days of President Grant.
News of Hardings death was sped to Vice President Coolidge, then visiting at his fathers New England farmhouse.
By the light of two kerosene lamps, the elder Coolidge, a justice of the peace, used the old family Bible to administer the presidential oath to his son.
This homespun setting was symbolic of Coolidge.
Quite unlike Harding, the stern-faced Vermonter, with his thin nose and tightly set lips, embodied the New England virtues of honesty, morality, industry, and frugality.
As a youth, his father reported, he seemed to get more sap out of a maple tree than did any of the other boys.
Practicing a rigid economy in both money and words, Silent Cal came to be known in Washington conversational circles for his brilliant flashes of silence.
His dour, serious visage prompted the acid observation that he had been weaned on a pickle.
Coolidge seemed to be a crystallization of the commonplace.
Painfully shy, he was blessed with only mediocre powers of leadership.
He would occasionally display a dry wit in private, but his speeches, delivered in a nasal New England twang, were invariably boring.
A staunch apostle of the status quo, he was no knight in armor riding forth to tilt at wrongs.
His only horse, in fact, was an electricpowered steed on which he took his exercise.
True to Republican philosophy, he became the high priest of the great god Business.
He believed that the man who builds a factory builds a temple and that the man who works there worships there.
The hands-off temperament of Cautious Cal Coolidge suited the times perfectly.
His thrifty nature caused him to sympathize fully with Secretary of the Treasury Mellons efforts to reduce both taxes and debts.
No foe of industrial bigness, he let business have its head.
Coolidge luck held during his five and a half prosperity-blessed years.
Ever a profile in caution, Coolidge slowly gave the Harding regime a badly needed moral fumigation.
Teapot Dome had scalded the Republican party badly, but so transparently honest was the vinegary Vermonter that the scandalous oil did not rub off on him.
The public, though at first shocked by the scandal, quickly simmered down, and an alarming tendency developed in certain quarters to excuse some of the wrongdoers on the grounds that they had gotten away with it.
Some critics even condemned the government prosecutors for continuing to rock the boat.
Americas moral sensibility was evidently being dulled by prosperity.
Sun-bronzed farmers were caught squarely in a boom-or-bust cycle in the postwar decade.
While the fighting had raged, they had raked in money hand over gnarled fist; by the spring of 1920, the price of wheat had shot up to an incredible $3 a bushel.
But peace brought an end to governmentguaranteed high prices and to massive purchases by C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 other nations, as foreign production reentered the stream of world commerce.
Machines also threatened to plow the farmers under an avalanche of their own overabundant crops.
The gasoline-engine tractor was working a revolution on American farms.
This steel mule was to cultivation and sowing what the McCormick reaper was to harvesting.
Blue-denimed farmers no longer had to plod after the horse-drawn plow with high-footed gait.
They could sit erect on their chugging mechanized chariots and turn under and harrow many acres in a single day.
They could grow bigger crops on larger areas, using fewer horses and hired hands.
The wartime boom had encouraged them to bring vast new tracts under cultivation, especially in the wheat belt of the upper Midwest.
But such improved efficiency and expanded agricultural acreage helped to pile up more pricedampening surpluses.
A withering depression swept through agricultural districts in the 1920s, when one farm in four was sold for debt or taxes.
As a plaintive song of the period ran, Schemes abounded for bringing relief to the hard-pressed farmers.
A bipartisan farm bloc from the agricultural states coalesced in Congress in 1921 and succeeded in driving through some helpful laws.
Noteworthy was the Capper-Volstead Act, which exempted farmers marketing cooperatives from antitrust prosecution.
The farm blocs favorite proposal was the McNary-Haugen Bill, pushed energetically from 1924 to 1928.
It sought to keep agricultural prices high by authorizing the government to buy up surpluses and sell them abroad.
Government losses were to be made up by a special tax on the farmers.
Congress twice passed the bill, but frugal Coolidge twice vetoed it.
Farm prices stayed down, and farmers political temperatures stayed high, reaching fever pitch in the election of 1924.
Self-satisfied Republicans, chanting Keep Cool and Keep Coolidge, nominated Silent Cal for the presidency at their convention in Cleveland in the simmering summer of 1924.
Squabbling Democrats had more difficulty choosing a candidate when they met in New Yorks sweltering Madison Square Garden.
Reflecting many of the cultural tensions of the decade, the party was hopelessly split between wets and drys, urbanites and farmers, Fundamentalists and Modernists, northern liberals and southern stand-patters, immigrants and old-stock Americans.
In one symptomatic spasm of discord, the conventioneers failed by just one vote to pass a resolution condemning the Ku Klux Klan.
Deadlocked for an unprecedented 102 ballots, the convention at last turned wearily, sweatily, and unenthusiastically to John W. Davis.
A wealthy corporation lawyer connected with the Wall Street banking house of J. P. Morgan and Company, the polished nominee was no less conservative than cautious Calvin Coolidge.
The field was now wide open for a liberal candidate.
The white-pompadoured Senator (Fighting Bob) La Follette from Wisconsin, perennial aspirant to the presidency and now sixty-nine years of age, sprang forward to lead a new Progressive grouping.
He gained the endorsement of the American Federation of Labor and enjoyed the support of the shrinking Socialist party, but his major constituency was made up of the price-pinched farmers.
La Follettes new Progressive party, fielding only a presidential ticket, with no candidates for local office, was a head without a body.
It proved to be only a shadow of the robust Progressive coalition of prewar days.
Its platform called for government ownership of railroads and relief for farmers, lashed out at monopoly and antilabor injunctions, and urged a constitutional amendment to limit the Supreme Courts power to invalidate laws passed by Congress.
La Follette turned in a respectable showing, polling nearly 5 million votes.
But Cautious Cal and the oil-smeared Republicans slipped easily back into office, overwhelming Davis, 15,718,211 to 8,385,283.
The electoral count stood at 382 for Coolidge, 136 for Davis, and 13 for La Follette, all from his home state of Wisconsin (see the map below).
As the so-called conscience of the calloused 1920s, La Follette injected a badly needed liberal tonic into a decade drugged on prosperity.
But times were too good for too many for his reforming message to carry the day.
Isolation continued to reign in the Coolidge era.
Despite presidential proddings, the Senate proved unwilling to allow America to adhere to the World Courtthe judicial arm of the still-suspect League of Nations.
Coolidge only halfheartedlyand unsuccessfullypursued further naval disarmament after the loudly trumpeted agreements worked out at the Washington Conference in 1922.
A glaring exception to the United States inward-looking indifference to the outside world was the armed interventionism in the Caribbean and Central America.
American troops were withdrawn (after an eight-year stay) from the Dominican Republic in 1924, but they remained in Haiti C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 CoolidgeRepublican DavisDemocratic La FolletteProgressive Presidential Election of 1924 (showing popular vote by county) Note the concentration of La Follettes votes in the old Populist strongholds of the Midwest and the mountain states.
His ticket did especially well in the grain-growing districts battered by the postwar slump in agricultural prices.
from 1914 to 1934.
President Coolidge in 1925 briefly removed American bayonets from troubled Nicaragua, where they had glinted intermittently since 1909, but in 1926 he sent them back, five thousand strong, and they stayed until 1933.
American oil companies clamored for a military expedition to Mexico in 1926 when the Mexican government began to assert its sovereignty over oil resources.
Coolidge kept cool and defused the Mexican crisis with some skillful diplomatic negotiating.
But his mailed-fist tactics elsewhere bred sore resentments south of the Rio Grande, where angry critics loudly assailed  Overshadowing all other foreign-policy problems in the 1920s was the knotty issue of international debts, a complicated tangle of private loans, Allied war debts, and German reparations payments.
Almost overnight, World War I had reversed the international financial position of the United States.
In 1914 America had been a debtor nation in the sum of about $4 billion; by 1922 it had become a creditor nation in the sum of about $16 billion.
The almighty dollar rivaled the pound sterling as the financial giant of the world.
American investors loaned some $10 billion to foreigners in the 1920s, though even this huge river of money could not fully refloat the war-shelled world economy.
Americans, bewitched by lucrative investment opportunities in their domestic economy, did not lend nearly so large a fraction of their national income overseas as had the British in the prewar period.
The key knot in the debt tangle was the $10 billion that the U.S.
Treasury had loaned to the Allies during and immediately after the war.
Uncle Sam held their IOUsand he wanted to be paid.
The Allies, in turn, protested that the demand for repayment was grossly unfair.
The French and the British pointed out, with much justice, that they had held up a wall of flesh and bone against the common foe until America the Unready had finally entered the fray.
America, they argued, should write off its loans as war costs, just as the Allies had been tragically forced to write off the lives of millions of young men.
The debtors also complained that the real effect of their borrowed dollars had been to fuel the boom in the already roaring wartime economy in America, where nearly all their purchases had been made.
And the final straw, protested the Europeans, was that Americas postwar tariff walls made it almost impossible for them to sell the goods to earn the dollars to pay their debts.
Americas tightfisted insistence on getting its money back helped to harden the hearts of the Allies against conquered Germany.
The French and the British demanded that the Germans make enormous reparations payments, totaling some $32 billion, as compensation for war-inflicted damages.
The Allies hoped to settle their debts to the United States with the money received from Germany.
The French, seeking to extort lagging reparations payments, sent troops into Germanys industrialized Ruhr Valley in 1923.
Berlin responded by permitting its currency to inflate astronomically.
At one point in October 1923, a loaf of bread cost 480 million marks, or about $120 million in preinflation money.
German society teetered on the brink of mad anarchy, and the whole international house of financial cards threatened to flutter down in colossal chaos.
Sensible statesmen now urged that war debts and reparations alike be drastically scaled down or even canceled outright.
But to Americans such proposals smacked of welshing on a debt.
We went across, but they wont come across, cried a prominent politician.
Scroogelike, Calvin Coolidge turned aside suggestions of debt cancellation with a typically terse question: They hired the money, didnt they?
The Washington administration proved especially unrealistic in its dogged insistence that there was no connection whatever between debts and reparations.
Reality finally dawned in the Dawes Plan of 1924.
Negotiated largely by Charles Dawes, about to be nominated as Coolidges running mate, it rescheduled German reparations payments and opened the way for further American private loans to Germany.
The whole financial cycle now became still more complicated, as U.S.
bankers loaned money to Germany, Germany paid reparations to France and Britain, and the former Allies paid war debts to the United States.
Clearly the source of this monetary merry-go-round was the flowing well of American credit.
When that well dried up after the great crash in 1929, the jungle of international finance quickly turned into a desert.
President Herbert Hoover declared a one-year debt moratorium in 1931, and before long all the debtors had defaultedexcept honest little Finland, which struggled along making payments until the last of its debt was discharged in 1976.
The United States never did get its money, but it harvested a bumper crop of ill will.
Irate French crowds on occasion attacked American tourists, and throughout Europe Uncle Sam was caricatured as Uncle Shylock, greedily whetting his knife for the last pound of Allied flesh.
The bad taste left in American mouths by the whole sorry episode contributed powerfully to the storm-cellar neutrality legislation passed by Congress in the 1930s.
Poker-faced Calvin Coolidge, the tight-lipped Sphinx of the Potomac, bowed out of the 1928 presidential race when he announced, I do not choose to run.
His logical successor was superSecretary (of Commerce) Herbert Hoover, unpopular with the political bosses but the much-admired darling of the masses, who asked, Hoo but Hoover?
He was nominated on a platform that clucked contentedly over both prosperity and prohibition.
Still-squabbling Democrats nominated Alfred E. Smith, four-time governor of New York and one of the most colorful personalities in American politics.
He was a wisecracking, glad-handing liberal who suffered from several fatal political handicaps.
Al(cohol) Smith was soakingly and drippingly wet at a time when the country was still devoted to the noble experiment of prohibition.
To a nation that had only recently moved to the city, native New Yorker Smith seemed too abrasively urban.
He was a Roman Catholic in an overwhelmingly Protestantand unfortunately prejudiced land.
Many dry, rural, and Fundamentalist DemC HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 U.S.
INVESTORS WALL STREET BANKERS GREAT BRITAIN U.S.
TREASURY FRANCE GERMANY Private $ loans Debt payments Allied war debt payments Allied war debt payments Reparations Reparations Aspects of the Financial  Merry-go-round, 19211933 Great Britain, with a debt of over  $4 billion owed to the U.S.
Treasury, had a huge stake in proposals for inter-Allied debt cancellation, but Frances stake was even larger.
Less prosperous than Britain in the 1920s and more battered by the war, which had been fought on its soil, France owed nearly $3.5 billion to the United States and additional billions to Britain.
ocrats gagged on his candidacy, and they saddled the wet Smith with a dry running mate and a dry platform.
Jauntily sporting a brown derby and a big cigar, Smith, the Happy Warrior, tried to carry alcohol on one shoulder and water on the other.
But his effort was doomed from the start.
Radio figured prominently in this campaign for the first time, and it helped Hoover more than Smith.
The New Yorker had more personal sparkle, but he could not project it through the radio (which in his Lower East Side twang he pronounced radddee-o, grating on the ears of many listeners).
Iowaborn Hoover, with his double-breasted dignity, came out of the microphone better than he went in.
Decrying un-American socialism and preaching rugged individualism, he sounded both grassrootish and statesmanlike.
Chubby-faced, ruddy-complexioned Herbert Hoover, with his painfully high starched collar, was a living example of the American success story and an intriguing mixture of two centuries.
As a poor orphan boy who had worked his way through Stanford University, he had absorbed the nineteenthcentury copybook maxims of industry, thrift, and self-reliance.
As a fabulously successful mining engineer and a brilliant businessman, he had honed to a high degree the efficiency doctrines of the progressive era.
A small-town boy from Iowa and Oregon, he had traveled and worked abroad extensively.
Long years of self-imposed exile had deepened his determination, abundantly supported by national tradition, to avoid foreign entanglements.
His experiences abroad had further strengthened his faith in American individualism, free enterprise, and small government.
With his unshaken dignity and Quaker restraint, Hoover was a far cry from the typical backslapping politician.
Though a citizen of the world and laden with international honors, he was quite shy, standoffish, and stiff.
Personally colorless in public, he had been accustomed during much of his life to  giving orders to subordinates and not to soliciting votes.
Never before elected to public office, he was thin-skinned in the face of criticism, and he did not adapt readily to the necessary give-and-take of political accommodation.
His real power lay in his integrity, his humanitarianism, his passion for assembling the facts, his efficiency, his talents for administration, and his ability to inspire loyalty in close associates.
They called him the Chief.
As befitted Americas newly mechanized civilization, Hoover was the ideal businesspersons candidate.
A self-made millionaire, he recoiled from anything suggesting socialism, paternalism, or planned economy.
Yet as secretary of commerce, he had exhibited some progressive instincts.
He endorsed labor unions and supported federal regulation of the new radio broadcasting industry.
He even flirted for a time with the idea of governmentowned radio, similar to the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).
As bands blared Smiths theme song, The Sidewalks of New York, the campaign sank into the  sewers beneath the sidewalks.
Despite the best efforts of Hoover and Smith, below-the-belt tactics were employed to a disgusting degree by lower-level campaigners.
Religious bigotry raised its hideous head over Smiths Catholicism.
An irresponsible whispering campaign claimed that A Vote for Al Smith Is a Vote for the Pope and that the White House, under Smith, would become a branch of the Vaticancomplete with Rum, Romanism, and Ruin.
Hoovers attempts to quash such rumors were in vain.
The proverbially solid South100 percent American and a stronghold of Protestant Ku Klux Klanismshied away from city slicker Al Smith.
It might have accepted a Catholic, or a wet, or the descendant of Irish grandparents, or an urbanite.
But a concoction of Catholicism, wettism, foreignism, and liberalism brewed on the sidewalks of New York was too bitter a dose for southern stomachs.
Smiths theme song was a constant and rasping reminder that his upbringing had not been convincingly American.
Hoover triumphed in a landslide.
He bagged 21,391,993 popular votes to 15,016,169 for his embittered opponent, while rolling up an electoral count of 444 to 87.
A huge Republican majority was returned to the House of Representatives.
Tens of thousands of dry southern DemocratsHoovercratsrebelled against Al Smith, and Hoover proved to be the first Republican candidate in fiftytwo years, except for Hardings Tennessee victory in 1920, to carry a state that had seceded.
He swept five states of the former Confederacy, as well as all the Border States.
Prosperity in the late 1920s smiled broadly as the Hoover years began.
Soaring stocks on the bull market continued to defy the laws of financial gravitation.
But two immense groups of citizens were not getting their share of the riches flowing from the national cornucopia: the unorganized wage earners and especially the disorganized farmers.
Hoovers administration, in line with its philosophy of promoting self-help, responded to the  outcry of the wounded farmers with legislative aspirin.
The Agricultural Marketing Act, passed by Congress in June 1929, was designed to help the farmers help themselves, largely through producers cooperatives.
It set up the Federal Farm Board, with a revolving fund of half a billion dollars at its disposal.
Money was lent generously to farm organizations seeking to buy, sell, and store agricultural surpluses.
In 1930 the Farm Board itself created both the Grain Stabilization Corporation and the Cotton Stabilization Corporation.
The prime goal was to bolster sagging prices by buying up surpluses.
But the two agencies were soon suffocated by an avalanche of farm produce, as wheat dropped to fifty-seven cents a bushel and cotton to five cents a pound.
Farmers had meanwhile clutched at the tariff as a possible straw to help keep their heads above the C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 WASH.
7 ORE.
5 CALIF.
13 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 5 COLO.
8 ARIZ.
3 S.D.
5 KANSAS 10 OKLA.
10 MICH.
15 N.Y.
45 N.D.
5 MINN.
12 IOWA 13 NEBR.
8 MO.
18 ARK.
9 LA.
10 TEXAS 20 N.M.
3 MISS.
10 ALA.
12 GA.
14 FLA.
6 TENN.
12 N.C.
12 S.C.
9 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 PA.
38 OHIO 24 IND.
5 ILL.
29 WISC.
13 KY.
13 ME.
6 N.H.
4 VT.
4 MASS.
18 R.I.
5 CONN.
7 N.J.
14 DEL.
3 MD.
8 HooverRepublican SmithDemocratic Presidential Election of 1928  (with electoral vote by state) Smith, despite his defeat, managed to poll almost as many votes as the victorious Coolidge had in 1924.
By attracting to the party an immense urban or sidewalk vote, the breezy New Yorker foreshadowed Roosevelts New Deal victory in 1932, when the Democrats patched together the solid South and the urban North.
A cruel joke had Smith cabling the Pope a single word after the election: Unpack.
waters of financial ruin.
During the recent presidential campaign, Hoover, an amateur in politics, had been stampeded into a politically unwise pledge.
He had promised to call Congress into special session to consider agricultural relief and, specifically, to bring about limited changes in the tariff.
These hope-giving assurances no doubt won many votes for Hoover in the midwestern farm belt.
The Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930 followed the well-worn pattern of Washington horse trading.
It started out in the House as a fairly reasonable protective measure, designed to assist the farmers.
But by the time the high-pressure lobbyists had pushed it through the Senate, it had acquired about a thousand amendments.
It thus turned out to be the highest protective tariff in the nations peacetime history.
The average duty on nonfree goods was raised  from 38.5 percent, as established by the FordneyMcCumber Act of 1922, to nearly 60 percent.
To angered foreigners, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff was a blow below the trade belt.
It seemed like a declaration of economic warfare on the entire outside world.
It reversed a promising worldwide trend toward reasonable tariffs and widened the yawning trade gaps.
It plunged both America and other nations deeper into the terrible depression that had already begun.
It increased international financial chaos and forced the United States further into the bog of economic isolationism.
And economic isolationism, both at home and abroad, was playing directly into the hands of a hate-filled German demagogue, Adolf Hitler.
When Herbert Hoover confidently took the presidential oath on March 4, 1929, there were few black clouds on the economic horizon.
The long boom seemed endless, with the painful exception of the debt-blanketed farm belt.
Americas productive colossusstimulated by the automobile, radio, movie, and other new industrieswas roaring along at a dizzy speed that suggested a permanent plateau of prosperity.
Few people sensed that it might smother its own fires by pouring out too much.
The speculative bubble was actually near the bursting point.
Prices on the stock exchange continued to spiral upward and create a fools paradise of paper profits, despite Hoovers early but fruitless efforts to curb speculation through the Federal Reserve Board.
A few prophets of disaster were bold enough to sound warnings but were drowned out by the mad chatter of the ticker-tape machine.
A catastrophic crash came in October 1929.
It was partially triggered by the British, who raised their interest rates in an effort to bring back capital lured abroad by American investments.
Foreign investors and wary domestic speculators began to dump their insecurities, and an orgy of selling followed.
Tension built up to the panicky Black Tuesday of October 29, 1929, when 16,410,030 shares of stocks were sold in a save-who-may scramble.
Wall Street became a wailing wall as gloom and doom replaced boom, and suicides increased alarmingly.
A sick joke of the time had hotel room clerks ask registrants, For sleeping or jumping?
Losses, even in blue-chip securities, were unbelievable.
By the end of 1929two months after the initial crashstockholders had lost $40 billion in paper values, or more than the total cost of World War I to the United States.
The stock-market collapse heralded a business depression, at home and abroad, that was the most prolonged and prostrating in American or world experience.
No other industrialized nation suffered so severe a setback.
By the end of 1930, more than 4 million workers in the United States were jobless; two years later the figure had about tripled.
Hungry and despairing workers pounded pavements in search of nonexistent jobs (Were firing, not hiring).
Where employees were not discharged, wages and salaries were often slashed.
A current jingle ran, The misery and gloom were incalculable, as forests of dead chimneys stood stark against the sky.
Over five thousand banks collapsed in the first three years of the depression, carrying down with them the life savings of tens of thousands of ordinary citizens.
Countless thousands of honest, hard-working people lost their homes and farms to the foreclosers hammer.
Bread lines formed, soup kitchens dispensed food, and apple sellers stood shivering on street corners trying to peddle their wares for five cents.
Families felt the stress, as jobless fathers nursed their guilt and shame at not being able to provide for their households.
Breadless breadwinC HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 1921 1923 1925 1927 1929 1931 1933 1935 1937 BULL MARKET CRASH DEPRESSION NEW DEAL RECOVER Y FDR'S ELECTION 200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Index of Common Stock Prices (1926 = 100) We still pray to be given each day our daily bread.
Yet there is too much bread, too much wheat and corn, meat and oil and almost every commodity required by man  for his subsistence and material happiness.
We are not able to purchase the abundance that modern methods of agriculture, mining and manufacture make available in such bountiful quantities.
Why is mankind being asked to go hungry and cold and poverty stricken in the midst of plenty?
ners often blamed themselves for their plight, despite abundant evidence that the economic system, not individual initiative, had broken down.
Mothers meanwhile nursed fewer babies, as hard times reached even into the nations bedrooms, precipitating a decade-long dearth of births.
As cash registers gathered cobwebs, the song My God, How the Money Rolls In was replaced with Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?
What caused the Great Depression?
One basic explanation was overproduction by both farm and factory.
Ironically, the depression of the 1930s was one of abundance, not want.
It was the great glut or the plague of plenty.
The nations ability to produce goods had clearly outrun its capacity to consume or pay for them.
Too much money was going into the hands of a few wealthy people, who in turn invested it in factories and other agencies of production.
Not enough was going into salaries and wages, where revitalizing purchasing power could be more quickly felt.
Other maladies were at work.
Overexpansion of credit through installment-plan buying overstimulated production.
Paying on so-called easy terms caused many consumers to dive in beyond their depth.
Normal technological unemployment, resulting from new laborsaving machines, also added its burden to the abnormal unemployment of the threadbare thirties.
This already bleak picture was further darkened by economic anemia abroad.
Britain and the Continent had never fully recovered from the upheaval of World War I. Depression in America was given a further downward push by a chain-reaction financial collapse in Europe, following the failure in 1931 of a prominent Vienna banking house.
A drying up of international trade, moreover, had been hastened by the shortsighted Hawley-Smoot Tariff of 1930.
European uncertainties over reparations, war debts, and defaults on loans owed to America caused tensions that reacted unfavorably on the United States.
Many of these conditions had been created or worsened by Uncle Sams own narrow-visioned policies, but it was now too late to unscramble the omelet.
As if man-made disasters were not enough, a terrible drought scorched the Mississippi Valley in 1930.
Thousands of farms were sold at auction for taxes, though in some cases kind neighbors would intimidate prospective buyers, bid one cent, and return the property to its original owner.
Farm  tenancy or rentala species of peonagewas spreading at an alarming rate among both whites and blacks.
By 1930 the depression had become a national calamity.
Through no fault of their own, a host of industrious citizens had lost everything.
They wanted to workbut there was no work.
The insidious effect of all this dazed despair on the nations spirit was incalculable and long-lasting.
Americas uniqueness no longer seemed so unique or its Manifest Destiny so manifest.
Hitherto the people had grappled with storms, trees, stones, and other physical obstacles.
But the depression was a baffling wraith they could not grasp.
Initiative and selfrespect were stifled, as panhandlers begged for food or charity soup.
In extreme cases ragged individualists slept under Hoover blankets (old newspapers), fought over the contents of garbage cans, or cooked their findings in old oil drums in tin-andpaper shantytowns cynically named Hoovervilles.
The very foundations of Americas social and political structure trembled.
Hoovers exalted reputation as a wonder-worker and efficiency engineer crashed about as dismally as the stock market.
He doubtless would have shone in the C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 I do not believe that the power and duty of the General Government ought to be extended to the relief of individual suffering.
The lesson should be constantly enforced that though the people support the Government the Government should not support the people.
prosperity-drenched Coolidge years, when he had foreseen the abolition of poverty and poor-houses.
But damming the Great Depression proved to be a task beyond his engineering talents.
The perplexed president was impaled on the horns of a cruel dilemma.
As a deservedly famed humanitarian, he was profoundly distressed by the widespread misery about him.
Yet as a rugged individualist, deeply rooted in an earlier era of free enterprise, he shrank from the heresy of government handouts.
Convinced that industry, thrift, and self-reliance were the virtues that had made America great, President Hoover feared that a government doling out doles would weaken, perhaps destroy, the national fiber.
As the depression nightmare steadily worsened, relief by local government agencies broke down.
Hoover was finally forced to turn reluctantly from his doctrine of log-cabin individualism and accept the proposition that the welfare of the people in a nationwide catastrophe is a direct concern of the national government.
The president at last worked out a compromise between the old hands-off philosophy and the soul-destroying direct dole then being used in England.
He would assist the hard-pressed railroads, banks, and rural credit corporations, in the hope that if financial health were restored at the top of the economic pyramid, unemployment would be relieved at the bottom on a trickle-down basis.
Hoover happened to be in a bad spot.
The Depression came on, and there he was.
If Jesus Christ had been there, hed have had the same problem.
Its too bad for poor old Herbie that he happened to be there.
This was a world-wide Depression.
It wasnt Hoovers fault.
In 1932, .
a monkey could have been elected against him, no question about it.
Partisan critics sneered at the Great Humanitarianhe who had fed the faraway Belgians but would not use federal funds to feed needy Americans.
Hostile commentators remarked that he was willing to lend government money to the big bankers, who allegedly had plunged the country into the mess.
He would likewise lend money to agricultural organizations to feed pigsbut not people.
Pigs, the cynics of the time noted, had no character to undermine.
Much of this criticism was unfair.
Although continued suffering seemed to mock the effectiveness of Hoovers measures, his efforts probably prevented a more serious collapse than did occur.
And his expenditures for relief, revolutionary for that day, paved the path for the enormous federal outlays of his New Deal successor, Franklin Roosevelt.
Hoover proved that the old bootstrap-pulling techniques would no longer work in a crisis of this magnitude, especially when people lacked boots.
President Hoover, in line with his trickle-down philosophy, at last recommended that Congress vote immense sums for useful public works.
Though at heart an antispender, he secured from Congress appropriations totaling $2.25 billion for such  projects.
Most imposing of the public enterprises was the gigantic Hoover Dam on the Colorado River.
Voted by Congress in the days of Coolidge, it was begun in 1930 under Hoover and completed in 1936 under Roosevelt.
It succeeded in creating a huge manmade lake for purposes of irrigation, flood control, and electric power.
But Hoover sternly fought all schemes that he regarded as socialistic.
Conspicuous among them was the Muscle Shoals Bill, designed to dam the Tennessee River and ultimately embraced by Franklin Roosevelts Tennessee Valley Authority.
Hoover emphatically vetoed this measure, primarily because he opposed the governments selling electricity in competition with its own citizens in private companies.
Early in 1932 Congress, responding to Hoovers belated appeal, established the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC).
With an initial working capital of half a billion dollars, this agency became a government lending bank.
It was designed to provide indirect relief by assisting insurance companies, banks, agricultural organizations, railroads, and even hard-pressed state and local governments.
But to preserve individualism and character, there would be no loans to individuals from this billiondollar soup kitchen.
Pump-priming loans by the RFC were no doubt of widespread benefit, though the organization was established many months too late for maximum usefulness.
Projects that it supported were largely self-liquidating, and the government as a banker actually profited to the tune of many millions of dollars.
Giant corporations so obviously benefited from this assistance that the RFC was dubbedrather unfairlythe millionaires dole.
The irony is that the thrifty and individualistic Hoover had sponsored the project, though with initial reluctance.
It actually had a strong New Dealish flavor.
Hoovers administration also provided some indirect benefits for labor.
After stormy debate, Congress passed the NorrisLa Guardia AntiInjunction Act in 1932, and Hoover signed it.
The measure outlawed yellow-dog (antiunion) contracts and forbade the federal courts to issue injunctions to restrain strikes, boycotts, and peaceful picketing.
The truth is that Herbert Hoover, despite criticism of his heartlessness, did inaugurate a significant new policy.
In previous panics the masses had been forced to sweat it out.
Slow though Hoover was to abandon this nineteenth-century bias, by the end of his term he had started down the road  toward government assistance for needy citizens a road that Franklin Roosevelt would travel much farther.
Hoovers woes were increased by a hostile Congress.
At critical times during his first two years, the Republican majority proved highly uncooperative.
Friction worsened during his last two years.
A depression-cursed electorate, rebelling in the congressional elections of 1930, so reduced the Republican majority that Democrats controlled the new House and almost controlled the Senate.
Insurgent Republicans couldand didcombine with opposition Democrats to harass Hoover.
Some of the presidents troubles were deliberately manufactured by Congress, who, in his words, played politics with human misery.
C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 The pages of  for the pungent commentary they provide on historical events.
With one image rather than many words, a cartoonist can convey a point of view much the way editorial writers do.
This cartoon appeared in the  1932, three and one-half months before Republican President Hoover lost the presidential election to his Democratic challenger Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The cartoonist foretells Hoovers defeat in November and departure from the White House the following March (not January, as at present), and expresses his support for the Home Loan Bank Bill.
With this proposal, Hoover sought to come to the aid of home mortgage lenders in order to forestall them from foreclosing on homeowners.
The cartoonist jokes that Hoover supported this bill because he identified with home owners about to lose their homes, but he also cleverly insinuates that Hoovers banking reform was motivated by electoral opportunism.
Surely Hoover sought to win public support in return for his new banking program as he battled for reelection, but the Home Loan Bank Bill also reflected Hoovers growing recognition that the federal government had to take direct action to remedy flaws that had precipitated the crisis of the Great Depression.
As Hoover later recorded in his memoirs, All this seems dull economics, but the poignant American drama revolving around the loss of the old homestead had a million repetitions straight from life, not because of the designing villain but because of a fault in our financial system.
How does the cartoonist use caricature to make his point?
What accounts for the political cartoons special power?
Are there limitations to this genre?
Find another cartoon in the book and subject it to similar analysis.
Many veterans of World War I were numbered among the hard-hit victims of the depression.
Industry had secured a bonusthough a dubious onein the Hawley-Smoot Tariff.
So the thoughts of the former soldiers naturally turned to what the government owed them for their services in 19171918, when they had saved democracy.
A drive developed for the premature payment of the deferred bonus voted by Congress in 1924 and payable in 1945.
Thousands of impoverished veterans, both of war and of unemployment, were now prepared to move on to Washington, there to demand of Congress the immediate payment of their  The Bonus Expeditionary Force (BEF), which mustered about twenty thousand souls, converged on the capital in the summer of 1932.
These supplicants promptly set up unsanitary public camps  and erected shacks on vacant lotsa gigantic Hooverville.
They thus created a menace to the public health, while attempting to intimidate Congress by their presence in force.
After the pending bonus bill had failed in Congress by a narrow margin, Hoover arranged to pay the return fare of about six thousand bonus marchers.
The rest refused to decamp, though ordered to do so.
Following riots that cost two lives, Hoover responded to the demands of the Washington authorities by ordering the army to evacuate the unwanted guests.
Although Hoover charged that the Bonus Army was led by riffraff and reds, in fact only a sprinkling of them were former convicts and communist agitators.
The eviction was carried out by General Douglas MacArthur with bayonets and tear gas, and with far more severity than Hoover had planned.
A few of the former soldiers were injured as the torch was put to their pathetic shanties in the inglorious Battle of Anacostia Flats.
An elevenmonth-old bonus baby allegedly died from exposure to tear gas.
This brutal episode brought down additional abuse on the once-popular Hoover, who by now was the most loudly booed man in the country.
The Democrats, not content with Hoovers vulnerable record, employed professional smear artists to drive him from office.
Cynics sneered that the Great Engineer had in a few months ditched, drained, and damned the country.
The existing panic was unfairly branded the Hoover depression.
In truth, Hoover had been oversold as a wizard, and the public grumbled when his magicians wand failed to produce rabbits.
The time was ripening for the Democratic partyand Franklin D. Rooseveltto cash in on Hoovers calamities.
The Great Depression, which brewed enough distress at home, added immensely to difficulties abroad.
Militaristic Japan stole the Far Eastern spotlight.
In September 1931 the Japanese imperialists, noting that the Western world was badly mired in a depression, lunged into Manchuria.
Alleging provocation, they rapidly overran the coveted Chinese province and proceeded to bolt shut the Open Door in the conquered area.
Peaceful peoples were stunned by this act of naked aggression, which was a flagrant violation of the League of Nations covenant, as well as of various other international agreements solemnly signed by Tokyo.
Numerous indignant Americans, though by no means a majority, urged strong measures ranging from boycotts to blockades.
Possibly a tight blockade by the League, backed by the United States, would have brought Japan sharply to book.
But the League was handicapped in taking twofisted action by the nonmembership of the United States.
Washington flatly rebuffed initial attempts in 1931 to secure American cooperation in applying economic pressure on Japan.
Washington and Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson in the end decided to fire only paper bullets at the Japanese aggressors.
The so-called Stimson doctrine, proclaimed in 1932, declared that the United States would not recognize any territorial acquisitions achieved by force.
Righteous indignationor a preach-and-run policy would substitute for solid initiatives.
This verbal slap on the wrist from America did not deter the march of the Japanese militarists.
Smarting under a Chinese boycott, they bombed Shanghai in 1932, with shocking losses to civilians.
Outraged Americans launched informal boycotts of Japanese goods, chiefly dime-store knickknacks.
But there was no real sentiment for armed intervention among a depression-ridden people, who remained strongly isolationist during the 1930s.
In a broad sense, collective security died and World War II was born in 1931 on the windswept C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 plains of Manchuria.
The League members had the economic and naval power to halt Japan but lacked the courage to act.
One reasonthough not the only onewas that they could not count on Americas support.
Even so, the Republic came closer to stepping into the chill waters of internationalism than American prophets would have dared to predict in the early 1920s.
Hoovers arrival in the White House brought a more hopeful turn to relations with Americas southern neighbors.
The new president was deeply interested in the often troubled nations below the Rio Grande.
Shortly after his election in 1928, he had undertaken a goodwill tour of Latin Americaon a U.S.
battleship.
World depression softened an age-old aggressive attitude in the United States toward weak Latin neighbors.
Following the stock-market collapse of 1929, Americans had less money to invest abroad.
As millions of dollars worth of investments in Latin America went sour, many Yankees felt as though they were more preyed upon than preying.
Socalled economic imperialism became much less popular in the United States than it had been in the golden twenties.
As an advocate of international goodwill, Hoover strove to abandon the interventionist twist given to the Monroe Doctrine by Theodore Roosevelt.
In 1932 he negotiated a new treaty with  the French-speaking republic of Haiti, and this  pact, later supplanted by an executive agreement, I was soon to realize that my able Secretary was at times more of a warrior than a diplomat.
To him the phrase economic sanctions was the magic wand of force by which all peace could be summoned from the vasty deep.
Ever since Versailles I had held that economic sanctions meant war when applied to any large nation.
provided for the complete withdrawal of American  platoons by 1934.
Further pleasing omens came early in 1933, when the last marine leathernecks sailed away from Nicaragua after an almost continuous stay of some twenty years.
Herbert Hoover, the engineer in politics, thus happily engineered the foundation stones of the Good Neighbor policy.
Upon them rose an imposing edifice in the days of his successor, Franklin Roosevelt.
C HAPTER 33 The Politics of Boom and Bust, 19201932 American Legion founded Chicago race riot Esch-Cummins Transportation Act Merchant Marine Act Veterans Bureau created Capper-Volstead Act Five-Power Naval Treaty Four-Power and Nine-Power Treaties on the Far East Fordney-McCumber Tariff Law Teapot Dome scandal Harding dies; Coolidge assumes presidency Adjusted Compensation Act for veterans Dawes Plan for international finance U.S.
troops leave the Dominican Republic Coolidge wins three-way presidential election U.S.
troops occupy Nicaragua Kellogg-Briand Pact Hoover defeats Smith for presidency Hoover takes goodwill tour of Latin America Agricultural Marketing Act sets up Federal Farm Board Stock-market crash Hawley-Smoot Tariff Japanese invade Manchuria Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) established NorrisLa Guardia Anti-Injunction Act Bonus Army dispersed from  Washington, D.C.
For further reading, see page A23 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Great Depression and the New Deal  19331939 F RANKLIN D. R OOSEVELT ,  CAMPAIGN SPEECH , 1932 V oters were in an ugly mood as the presidential campaign of 1932 neared.
Countless factory chimneys remained ominously cold, while more than 11 million unemployed workers and their families sank ever deeper into the pit of poverty.
Herbert Hoover may have won the 1928 election by promising a chicken in every pot, but three years later that chicken seemed to have laid a discharge slip in every pay envelope.
Hoover, sick at heart, was renominated by the Republican convention in Chicago without great enthusiasm.
The platform indulged in extravagant praise of Republican antidepression policies, while halfheartedly promising to repeal national prohibition and return control of liquor to the states.
The rising star of the Democratic firmament was Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt of New York, a fifth cousin of Theodore Roosevelt.
Like the Rough Rider, he had been born to a wealthy New York family, had graduated from Harvard, had been elected as a kid-gloved politician to the New York legislature, had served as governor of the Empire State, had been nominated for the vice presidency (though not elected), and had served capably as assistant secretary of the navy.
Although both men were master politicians, adept with the colorful phrase, FDR was suave and conciliatory, whereas TR was pugnacious and confrontational.
Infantile paralysis, while putting steel braces on Franklin Roosevelts legs, put additional steel into his soul.
Until 1921, when the dread disease struck, young Roosevelttall (six feet two inches), athletic, and handsomeimpressed observers as charming and witty yet at times a superficial and arrogant lightweight.
But suffering humbled him to the level of common clay.
In courageously fighting his way back from complete helplessness to a hobbling mobility, he schooled himself in patience, tolerance, compassion, and strength of will.
He once remarked that after trying for two years to wiggle one big toe, all else seemed easy.
Another of Roosevelts great personal and political assets was his wife, Eleanor.
The niece of Theodore Roosevelt, she was Franklin Roosevelts distant cousin as well as his spouse.
Tall, ungainly, and toothy, she overcame the misery of an unhappy childhood and emerged as a champion of the dispossessedand, ultimately, as the conscience of the New Deal.
FDRs political career was as much hers as it was his own.
She traveled countless miles with him or on his behalf in all his campaigns, beginning with his run for the New York legislature before World War I, later considering herself his legs.
She was to become the most active First Lady in history.
Through her lobbying of her husband, her speeches, and her syndicated newspaper column, she powerfully influenced the policies of the national government.
Always she battled for the impoverished and the oppressed.
At one meeting  in Birmingham, Alabama, she confounded local authorities and flouted the segregation statutes by deliberately straddling the aisle separating the black and white seating sections.
Sadly, her personal relationship with her husband was often rocky, due to his occasional infidelity.
Condemned by conservatives and loved by liberals, she was one of the most controversialand consequentialpublic figures of the twentieth century.
Franklin Roosevelts political appeal was amazing.
His commanding presence and his golden speaking voice, despite a sophisticated accent, combined to make him the premier American orator of his generation.
He could turn on charm in private conversations as one would turn on a faucet.
As a popular depression governor of New York, he had sponsored heavy state spending to relieve human suffering.
Though favoring frugality, he believed that money, rather than humanity, was expendable.
He revealed a deep concern for the plight of the forgotten mana phrase he used in a 1932 speech although he was assailed by the rich as a traitor to his class.
Exuberant Democrats met in Chicago in June 1932 and speedily nominated Roosevelt.
Fellow New Yorker Al Smith felt entitled to a second chance, and a beautiful friendship wilted when he was elbowed aside for Franklin Roosevelt.
The Democratic platform came out more forthrightly than the Republican for repeal of prohibition, assailed the so-called Hoover depression, and promised not only a balanced budget but sweeping social and economic reforms.
Roosevelt flew daringly through stormy weather to Chicago, where he smashed precedent by accepting the nomination in person.
He electrified the delegates and the public with these words: I pledge you, I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 In the campaign that followed, Roosevelt seized the offensive with a slashing attack on the Republican Old Dealers.
He was especially eager to prove that he was not an invalid (Roosevelt Is Robust) and to display his magnificent torso and radiant personality to as many voters as possible.
Roosevelt consistently preached a New Deal for the forgotten man, but he was annoyingly vague and somewhat contradictory.
Many of his speeches were ghostwritten by the Brains Trust (popularly the Brain Trust), a small group of reform-minded intellectuals.
They were predominantly youngish college professors, who, as a kind of kitchen cabinet, later authored much of the New Deal legislation.
Roosevelt rashly promised a balanced budget and berated heavy Hooverian deficits, amid cries of Throw the Spenders Out!
and Out of the Red with Roosevelt.
All of this was to make ironic reading in later months.
The high spirits of the Democrats found expression in the catchy air Happy Days Are Here Again.
This theme song fit FDRs indestructible smile, his jauntily angled cigarette holder, his breezy optimism, and his promises to do something, even at the risk of bold experimentation.
Grim-faced Herbert Hoover remained in the White House, conscientiously battling the depression through short lunches and long hours.
Out on the firing line, his supporters halfheartedly assured half-listening voters, The Worst Is Past, It Might Have Been Worse, and Prosperity Is Just Around the Corner.
Hoover never ceased to insist that the uncertainty  and fear produced by Roosevelts impending victory plunged the nation deeper into the depression.
With the campaign going badly for the Republicans, a weary and despondent Hoover was persuaded to take to the stump.
He stoutly reaffirmed his faith in American free enterprise and individual initiative, and gloomily predicted that if the HawleySmoot Tariff were repealed, the grass would grow  in the streets of a hundred cities.
Such down-atthe-mouthism contrasted sharply with Roosevelts tooth-flashing optimism and sparkling promises.
Hoover had been swept into office on the rising tide of prosperity; he was swept out of office by the receding tide of depression.
The flood of votes totaled 22,809,638 for Roosevelt and 15,758,901 for Hoover; the electoral count stood at 472 to 59.
In all, the loser carried only six rock-ribbed Republican states.
One striking feature of the election was the beginning of a distinct shift of blacks, traditionally grateful to the Republican party of Lincoln, over to the Roosevelt camp.
As the last hired and first fired, black Americans had been among the worst sufferers from the depression.
Beginning with the election of 1932, they became, notably in the great urban centers of the North, a vital element in the Democratic party.
Hard times unquestionably ruined the Republicans, for the electoral upheaval in 1932 was as much anti-Hoover as it was pro-Roosevelt.
Democrats had only to harness the national grudge and let it pull them to victory.
An overwhelming majority appear to have voiced a demand for change:  rather than  gleam in the eyes of its sponsors.
Any upstanding Democratic candidate probably could have won.
The preinauguration lame duck period now ground slowly to an end.
Hoover, though defeated and repudiated, continued to be president for four long months, until March 4, 1933.
But he was helpless to embark upon any long-range policies  without the cooperation of Rooseveltand the victorious president-elect proved rather uncooperative.
Hoover at length succeeded in arranging two We often hear it said that government operation of anything under the sun is socialistic.
If that is so, our postal service is socialistic, so is the parcel post which has largely taken the place of the old express companies; so are the public highways which took the place of the toll roads.
meetings with him to discuss the war-debt muddle.
But Roosevelt, who airily remarked to the press, Its not my baby, fought shy of assuming responsibility without authority.
As Hoover privately confessed,  he was trying to bind his successor to an antiinflationary policy that would have made impossible many of the later New Deal experiments.
But in politics the winner, not the loser, calls the tune.
With Washington deadlocked, the vast and vaunted American economic machine clanked to a virtual halt.
One worker in four tramped the streets, feet weary and hands idle.
Banks were locking their doors all over the nation, as people nervously stuffed paper money under their mattresses.
Hooverites, then and later, accused Roosevelt of deliberately permitting the depression to worsen, so that he could emerge the more spectacularly as a savior.
Great crises often call forth gifted leaders, and the hand of destiny tapped Roosevelt on the shoulder.
On a dreary Inauguration Day, March 4, 1933, his vibrant voice, broadcast nationally from a bulletproof stand, provided the American people with inspirational new hope.
He denounced the money changers who had brought on the calamity and  declared that the government must wage war on the Great Depression as it would wage war on an armed foe.
His clarion note was, Let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.
Roosevelt moved decisively.
Now that he had full responsibility, he boldly declared a nationwide banking holiday, March 610, as a prelude to opening the banks on a sounder basis.
He then summoned the overwhelmingly Democratic Congress into special session to cope with the national emergency.
For the so-called Hundred Days (March 9June 16, 1933), members hastily cranked out an unprecedented basketful of remedial legislation.
Some of it derived from earlier progressivism, but these new measures mostly sought to deal with a desperate emergency.
Roosevelts New Deal programs aimed at three were relief and immediate recovery, especially in the first two years.
Long-range goals were permanent recovery and reform of current abuses, particularly those that had produced the boom-or-bust catastrophe.
The threegot in one anothers way.
But amid all the topsyturvy haste, the gigantic New Deal program lurched forward.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 Firmly ensconced in the drivers seat, President Roosevelt cracked the whip.
A green Congress so fully shared the panicky feeling of the country that it was ready to rubber-stamp bills drafted by White House advisersmeasures that Roosevelt called must legislation.
More than that, Congress gave the president extraordinary blank-check powers: some of the laws it passed expressly delegated  FDR closes banks, March 6, 1933 Emergency Banking Relief Act,  March 9, 1933 (Beer Act) (Beer Act) Beer and Wine Revenue Act, March 22, 1933 (CCC) Unemployment Relief Act, March 31, 1933, creates Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) FDR orders gold surrender, April 5, 1933 FDR abandons gold standard, April 19, 1933 (FERA) Federal Emergency Relief Act, May 12, 1933, creates Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) (AAA) Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), May 12, 1933 (TVA) (TVA) Tennessee Valley Authority Act (TVA), May 18, 1933 Federal Securities Act, May 27, 1933 Gold-payment clause repealed, June 5, 1933 (HOLC) Home Owners Refinancing Act, June 13, 1933, creates Home Owners  Loan Corporation (HOLC) National Industrial Recovery (NRA, PWA) (NRA) Act, June 16, 1933, creates National Recovery Administration (NRA), Public Works Administration (PWA) (Glass-Steagall Act) (Glass-Steagall Act) Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act, June 16, 1933, creates Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation *For later New Deal measures, see p.
784. legislative authority to the chief executive.
One senator complained that if FDR asked Congress to commit suicide tomorrow, theyd do it.
Roosevelt was delighted to exert executive leadership, and Congress responded to it, although he did not always know precisely where he was going.
He was inclined to do things by intuitionoff the cuff.
He was like the quarterback, as he put it, whose next play depends on the outcome of the previous play.
So desperate was the mood of an action-starved public that   seemed better than no movement at all.
The frantic Hundred Days Congress passed many essentials of the New Deal three  important long-range measures were added in later sessions.
These reforms owed much to the legacy of the preWorld War I progressive movement.
Many of them were long overdue, sidetracked by the war in Europe and the Old Guard reaction of the 1920s.
The New Dealers, sooner or later, embraced such progressive ideas as unemployment insurance, oldage insurance, minimum-wage regulations, conservation and development of natural resources, and restrictions on child labor.
A few such reforms had already made limited gains in some of the states.
Many of these forward-looking measures had been adopted a generation or so earlier by the more advanced countries of western Europe.
In the area of social welfare, the United States, in the eyes of many Europeans, remained a backward nation.
Banking chaos cried aloud for immediate action.
Congress pulled itself together and in an incredible eight hours had the Emergency Banking Relief Act of 1933 ready for Roosevelts busy pen.
The new law invested the president with power to regulate banking transactions and foreign exchange and to reopen solvent banks.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 Bank Failures Before and After the Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act of 1933 1920 1925 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1945 167 618 1352 2294 1456 57 0 4004 Roosevelt, the master showman, next turned to the radio to deliver the first of his thirty famous fireside chats.
As some 35 million people hung on his soothing words, he gave assurances that it was now safer to keep money in a reopened bank than under the mattress.
Confidence returned with a gush, and the banks began to unlock their doors.
The Emergency, or Hundred Days, Congress  buttressed public reliance on the banking system by enacting the memorable Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act.
This measure provided for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which insured individual deposits up to $5,000 (later raised).
Thus ended the disgraceful epidemic of bank failures, which dated back to the wildcat days of Andrew Jackson.
* Roosevelt moved swiftly elsewhere on the financial front, seeking to protect the melting gold reserve and to prevent panicky hoarding.
He ordered all private holdings of gold to be surrendered to the Treasury in exchange for paper currency and then took the nation off the gold standard.
The Emergency Congress responded to his recommendation by canceling the gold-payment clause in all contracts and authorizing repayment in paper money.
A managed currency was well on its way.
The goal of Roosevelts managed currency was inflation, which he believed would relieve debtors burdens and stimulate new production.
Roosevelts principal instrument for achieving inflation was gold buying.
He instructed the Treasury to purchase gold at increasing prices, ratcheting the dollar price of gold up from $21 an ounce in 1933 to $35 an ounce in early 1934, a price that held for nearly four decades.
This policy did increase the amount of dollars in circulation, as holders of gold cashed it in at the elevated prices.
But this inflationary result also provoked the wrath of sound-money critics, who gagged on the baloney dollar.
The gold-buying scheme came to an end in February 1934, when FDR returned the nation to a limited gold standard for purposes of international trade only.
Thereafter (until 1971see p.
954), the United States pledged itself to pay foreign bills, if requested, in gold at the rate of one ounce of gold for every $35 due.
But domestic circulation of gold continued to be prohibited, and gold coins became collectors items.
Overwhelming unemployment, even more than banking, clamored for prompt remedial action.
One out of every four workers was jobless when FDR took his inaugural oaththe highest level of unemployment in the nations history, before or since.
Roosevelt had no hesitancy about using federal money to assist the unemployed and at the same time to prime the pump of industrial recovery.
(A farmer has to pour a little water into a dry pump that is, prime itto start the flow.
) The Hundred Days Congress responded to Roosevelts spurs when it created the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which proved to be perhaps the most popular of all the New Deal alphabetical agencies.
This law provided employment in freshair government camps for about 3 million uniformed young men, many of whom might otherwise *When FDR was inaugurated in 1933, not a single Canadian bank had failed.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 (CWA) FDR establishes Civil Works Administration (CWA), November 9, 1933 Gold Reserve Act, January 30, 1934, authorizes FDRs devaluation, January 31, 1934 Securities and Exchange  Commission (SEC) authorized by Congress, June 6, 1934 (Reciprocal Trade Agreements) (Reciprocal Trade Agreements) Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, June 12, 1934 (see  pp.
808809) Indian Reorganization Act, June 18, 1934 (FHA) National Housing Act, (FHA) June 28, 1934, authorizes Federal Housing Administration (FHA) (Frazier-Lemke Act) Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act, June 28, 1934 (Resettlement Administration) FDR creates Resettlement Administration, April 30, 1935 (WPA) FDR creates Works Progress Administration (WPA), May 6, 1935, under act of April 8, 1935 (Wagner Act) (Wagner Act) (Wagner) National Labor Relations Act, July 5, 1935 Social Security Act, August 14, 1935 Public Utility Holding Company Act, August 26, 1935 (Soil Conservation Act) Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act, February 29, 1936 (USHA) (USHA) United States Housing Authority (USHA) established by Congress, September 1, 1937 (Second AAA) Second Agricultural Adjustment Act, February 16, 1938 (Fair Labor Standards) (Fair Labor Standards) Fair Labor Standards Act (Wages and Hours Bill), June 25, 1938 Reorganization Act, April 3, 1939 Hatch Act, August 2, 1939 have been driven by desperation into criminal habits.
Their work was usefulincluding reforestation, fire fighting (forty-seven lost their lives), flood control, and swamp drainage.
The recruits were required to help their parents by sending home most of their pay.
Both human resources and natural resources were thus conserved, though there were minor complaints of militarizing the nations youth.
Critics charged that CCC soldiers would later claim pensions for exposure to poison ivy.
The first major effort of the new Congress to grapple with the millions of adult unemployed was the Federal Emergency Relief Act.
Its chief aim was immediate relief rather than long-range recovery.
The resulting Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) was handed over to zealous Harry L. Hopkins, a painfully thin, shabbily dressed, chainsmoking New York social worker who had earlier won Roosevelts friendship and who became one of his most influential advisers.
Hopkinss agency in all granted about $3 billion to the states for direct dole payments or preferably for wages on work projects.
* Immediate relief was also given two large and hard-pressed special groups by the Hundred Days Congress.
One section of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) made available many millions of dollars to help farmers meet their mortgages.
Another law created the Home Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC).
Designed to refinance mortgages on nonfarm homes, it ultimately assisted about a million badly pinched households.
The agency not only bailed out mortgage-holding banks, it also bolted the political loyalties of relieved middle-class homeowners securely to the Democratic party.
Harassed by the continuing plague of unemployment, FDR himself established the Civil Works Administration (CWA) late in 1933.
As a branch of the FERA, it also fell under the direction of Hopkins.
Designed to provide purely temporary jobs during the cruel winter emergency, it served a useful purpose.
Tens of thousands of jobless were employed at leaf raking and other make-work tasks, which were dubbed boondoggling.
As this kind of labor put a premium on shovel-leaning slow motion, the scheme was widely criticized.
The only thing we have to fear, scoffers remarked, is work itself.
Direct relief from Washington to needy families helped pull the nation through the ghastly winter of 19331934.
But the disheartening persistence of unemployment and suffering demonstrated that emergency relief measures had to be not only continued but supplemented.
One danger signal was the appearance of various demagogues, notably a magnetic microphone messiah, Father Charles Coughlin, a Catholic priest in Michigan who began broadcasting in 1930 and whose slogan was Social Justice.
His antiNew Deal harangues to some 40 million radio fans finally became so anti-Semitic, fascistic, and demagogic that he was silenced in 1942 by his ecclesiastical superiors.
Also notorious among the new brood of agitators were those who capitalized on popular discontent to make pie-in-the-sky promises.
Most conspicuous of these individuals was Senator Huey P.
(Kingfish) Long of Louisiana, who was said to have more brass than a government mule.
He used his abundant rabble-rousing talents to publicize his Share Our Wealth program, which promised to *A boast attributed to Hopkins in 1938 was, We will spend and spend, tax and tax, and elect and elect.
make Every Man a King.
Every family was to receive $5,000, supposedly at the expense of the prosperous.
H. L. Mencken called Longs chief lieutenant, former clergyman Gerald L. K. Smith, the gutsiest, goriest, loudest and lustiest, the deadliest and damndest orator ever heard on this or any other earth, the champion boob-bumper of all time.
Fear of Longs becoming a fascist dictator ended when he was shot by an assassin in the Louisiana state capitol in 1935.
Another Pied Piper was gaunt Dr.
Francis E. Townsend of California, a retired physician whose savings had recently been wiped out.
He attracted the trusting support of perhaps 5 million senior citizens with his fantastic plan that nonetheless spoke to earthly need.
Each oldster sixty years of age or over was to receive $200 a month, provided that the money be spent within the month.
One estimate had the scheme costing one-half of the national income.
Partly to quiet the groundswell of unrest produced by such crackbrained proposals, Congress authorized the Works Progress Administration (WPA) in 1935.
The objective was employment on useful projects.
Launched under the supervision of the ailing but energetic Hopkins, this remarkable agency ultimately spent about $11 billion on thousands of public buildings, bridges, and hardsurfaced roads.
Not every WPA project strengthened the infrastructure: for instance, one controlled crickets in Wyoming, while another built a monkey pen in Oklahoma City.
Predictably, missions like these caused critics to sneer that WPA meant We Provide Alms.
But the fact is that over a period of C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 Our thanks are due to Almighty God in  that America retains her sovereignty.
Congratulations to the aroused people of the United States who, by more than 200,000 telegrams containing at least 1,000,000 names, demanded that the principles established by Washington and Jefferson shall keep us clear from foreign entanglements and European hatreds.
eight years, nearly 9 million people were given jobs, not handouts.
Agencies of the WPA also found part-time occupations for needy high school and college students and for such unemployed white-collar workers as actors, musicians, and writers.
John Steinbeck, future Nobel Prize novelist, counted dogs in his  California county.
Cynical taxpayers condemned lessons in tap dancing, as well as the painting of murals on post office walls.
But much precious talent was nourished, self-respect was preserved, and more than a million pieces of art were created, many of them publicly displayed.
A daring attempt to stimulate a nationwide comeback was initiated when the Emergency Congress authorized the National Recovery Administration (NRA).
This ingenious scheme was by far the most complex and far-reaching effort by the New Dealers to combine immediate relief with long-range recovery and reform.
Triple-barreled, it was designed to assist industry, labor, and the unemployed.
Individual industriesover two hundred in allwere to work out codes of fair competition, under which hours of labor would be reduced so that employment could be spread over more people.
A ceiling was placed on the maximum hours of labor; a floor was placed under wages to establish minimum levels.
Labor, under the NRA, was granted additional benefits.
Workers were formally guaranteed the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives  handpicked agents of the companys choosing.
The hated yellow-dog, or antiunion, contract was expressly forbidden, and certain safeguarding restrictions were placed on the use of child labor.
Industrial recovery through the NRA fair competition codes would at best be painful, for these called for self-denial by both management and labor.
Patriotism was aroused by mass meetings and monster parades, which included 200,000 marchers on New York Citys Fifth Avenue.
A handsome blue eagle was designed as the symbol of the NRA, and merchants subscribing to a code displayed it in their windows with the slogan We Do Our Part.
A newly formed professional football team was christened the Philadelphia Eagles.
Such was the enthusiasm for the NRA that for a brief period, there was a marked upswing in business activity, although Roosevelt had warned, We cannot ballyhoo our way to prosperity.
But the high-flying eagle gradually fluttered to earth.
Too much self-sacrifice was expected of labor, industry, and the public for such a scheme to work.
Critics began to brand NRA National Run Around and Nuts Running America, symbolized by what Henry Ford called that damn Roosevelt buzzard.
A new age of chiselry dawned as certain unscrupulous businesspeople (chiselers) publicly displayed the blue bird on their windows but secretly violated the codes.
Complete collapse was imminent when, in 1935, the Supreme Court shot down the dying eagle in the famed  sion.
The learned justices unanimously held that Congress could not delegate legislative powers to the executive.
They further declared that congressional control of interstate commerce could not properly apply to a local fowl business, like that  of the Schechter brothers in Brooklyn, New York.
Roosevelt was incensed by this horse and buggy interpretation of the Constitution, but actually the Court helped him out of a bad jam.
The same act of Congress that hatched the NRA eagle also authorized the Public Works Administration (PWA), likewise intended both for industrial recovery and for unemployment relief.
The agency was headed by the secretary of the interior, acidtongued Harold L. Ickes, a free-swinging former bull mooser.
Long-range recovery was the primary purpose of the new agency, and in time over $4 billion was spent on some thirty-four thousand projects, which included public buildings, highways, and parkways.
One spectacular achievement was the Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia Riverthe largest structure erected by humans since the Great Wall of China.
In the depths of the depression, the grand dam seemed the height of folly.
It made possible the irrigation of millions of acres of new farmlandat a time when the government was desperately trying to reduce farm surpluses.
It created more electrical power than the entire TVAin a region with little industry and virtually no market for additional power.
But with the outbreak of World War II and then postwar prosperity, the dam would come to seem a stroke of genius, transforming the entire region with abundant water and power.
Special stimulants aided the recovery of one segment of businessthe liquor industry.
The imminent repeal of the prohibition amendment afforded an opportunity to raise needed federal revenue and at the same time to provide a measure of employment.
Prodded by Roosevelt, the Hundred Days Congress, in one of its earliest acts, legalized light wine and beer with an alcoholic content (presumably nonintoxicating) not exceeding 3.2 percent by weight, and levied a tax of $5 on every barrel so manufactured.
Disgruntled drys, unwilling to acknowledge the breakdown of law and order begotten by bootlegging, damned Roosevelt as a 3.2 percent American.
Prohibition was officially repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment late in 1933 (see Appendix), and the saloon doors swung open.
Ever since the war-boom days of 1918, farmers had suffered from low prices and overproduction, especially in grain.
During the depression, conditions became desperate as innumerable mortgages were foreclosed, as corn was burned for fuel, and as embattled farmers tried to prevent shipment of crops to glutted markets.
In Iowa several volatile counties were placed under martial law.
A radical new approach to farm recovery was embraced when the Emergency Congress established the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA).
Through artificial scarcity this agency was to establish parity prices for basic commodities.
Parity was the price set for a product that gave it the same real value, in purchasing power, that it had enjoyed during the period from 1909 to 1914.
The AAA would eliminate price-depressing surpluses by paying growers to reduce their crop acreage.
The millions of dollars needed for these payments were to be raised by taxing processors of farm products, such as flour millers, who in turn would shift the burden to consumers.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 Farm Foreclosures and Defaults, 19291945 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 1929 1931 1933 1935 1937 1939 1941 1943 1945 Per thousand farms DEPRESSION PEAK NEW DEAL RELIEF WORLD WAR II BREAKS A Red is any son-of-a-bitch that wants  thirty cents an hour when were paying twenty-five!
Unhappily, the AAA got off to a wobbly start.
It was begun after much of the cotton crop for 1933 had been planted, and balky mules, trained otherwise, were forced to plow under countless young plants.
Several million squealing pigs were purchased and slaughtered.
Much of their meat was distributed to people on relief, but some of it was used for fertilizer.
This sinful destruction of food, at a time when thousands of citizens were hungry, increased condemnation of the American economic system by many left-leaning voices.
Subsidized scarcity did have the effect of raising farm income, but the whole confused enterprise met with acid criticism.
Farmers, food processors, consumers, and taxpayers were all to some degree unhappy.
Paying the farmers not to farm actually increased unemployment, at a time when other New Deal agencies were striving to decrease it.
When the Supreme Court finally killed the AAA in 1936 by declaring its regulatory taxation provisions unconstitutional, foes of the plow-under program rejoiced loudly.
Quickly recovering from this blow, the New Deal Congress hastened to pass the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act of 1936.
The withdrawal of acreage from production was now achieved by paying farmers to plant soil-conserving crops, like soybeans, or to let their land lie fallow.
With the emphasis thus on conservation, the Supreme Court placed the stamp of its approval on the revamped scheme.
The Second Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, passed two years later, was a more comprehensive substitute, although it continued conservation payments.
If growers observed acreage restrictions on specified commodities like cotton and wheat, they would be eligible for parity payments.
Other provisions of the new AAA were designed to give farmers not only a fairer price but a more substantial share of the national income.
Both goals were partially achieved.
Nature meanwhile had been providing some unplanned scarcity.
Late in 1933 a prolonged drought struck the states of the trans-Mississippi Great Plains.
Rainless weeks were followed by furious, whining winds, while the sun was darkened by millions of tons of powdery topsoil torn from homesteads in an area that stretched from eastern Colorado to western Missourisoon to be dubbed the Dust Bowl.
Despondent citizens sat on front porches with protective masks on their faces, watching their farms swirl by.
A seven-year-old boy in Kansas suffocated.
Overawed victims of the Dust Bowl disaster predicted the end of the world or the second coming of Christ.
Drought and wind triggered the dust storms, but they were not the only culprits.
The human hand had also worked its mischief.
High grain prices during World War I had enticed farmers to bring countless acres of marginal land under cultivation.
Worse, dry-farming techniques and mechanization had revolutionized Great Plains agriculture.
The steam tractor and the disk plow tore up infinitely more sod than a team of oxen ever could, leaving the powdery topsoil to be swept away at natures whim.
Denver Santa Fe Oklahoma City Topeka K A N S A S C O L O R A D O N E W M E X I C O T E X A S O K L A H O M A Severe wind erosion in 19351938 Most severe wind erosion in 19351938 The Extent of Erosion in the 1930s Note the extensive wind erosion in the western Oklahoma panhandle region, which was dubbed the Dust Bowl in the 1930s.
Mechanized farmers had busted the sod of the southern plains so thoroughly that they literally broke the back of the land.
Tons of dust blew out of the Dust Bowl in the 1930s and blotted the sun from the skies as far away as New York.
A Kansas newspaperman reported in 1935 that in his dust-darkened town, Lady Godiva could ride through streets without even  the horse seeing her.
Burned and blown out of the Dust Bowl, tens of thousands of refugees fled their ruined acres (see Makers of America: The Dust Bowl Migrants,  pp.
792793).
In five years about 350,000 Oklahomans and ArkansansOkies and Arkies trekked to southern California in junkyards on wheels.
The dismal story of these human tumbleweeds was realistically portrayed in John Steinbecks best-selling novel  proved to be the  Zealous New Dealers, sympathetic toward the soil-tillers, made various other efforts to relieve their burdens.
The Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act, passed in 1934, made possible a suspension of mortgage foreclosures for five years, but it was voided the next year by the Supreme Court.
A revised law, limiting the grace period to three years, was unanimously upheld.
In 1935 the president set up the Resettlement Administration, charged with the task of removing near-farmless farmers to better land.
And more than 200 million young trees were successfully planted on the bare prairies as windbreaks by the young men of the Civilian Conservation Corps, even though one governor jeered at trying to grow hair on a bald head.
Native Americans also felt the far-reaching hand of New Deal reform.
Commissioner of Indian Affairs John Collier ardently sought to reverse the forced-assimilation policies in place since the Dawes Act of 1887 (see p.
597).
Inspired by a sojourn among the Pueblo Indians in Taos, New Mexico, Collier promoted the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 (the Indian New Deal).
The new law encouraged tribes to establish local self-government and to preserve their native crafts and traditions.
The act also helped to stop the loss of Indian lands and revived tribes interest in their identity and culture.
Yet not all Indians applauded it.
Some denounced the legislation as a back-to-the-blanket measure that sought to make museum pieces out of Native Americans.
Seventy-seven tribes refused to organize under its provisions, though nearly two hundred others did establish tribal governments.
Reformist New Dealers were determined from the outset to curb the money changers who had played fast and loose with gullible investors before the Wall Street crash of 1929.
The Hundred Days Congress passed the Truth in Securities Act (Federal Securities Act), which required promoters to transmit to the investor sworn information regarding the soundness of their stocks and bonds.
An old C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 saying was thus reversed to read, Let the seller beware, although the buyer might never read the fine print.
In 1934 Congress took further steps to protect the public against fraud, deception, and inside manipulation.
It authorized the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which was designed as a watchdog administrative agency.
Stock markets henceforth were to operate more as trading marts and less as gambling casinos.
New Dealers likewise directed their fire at public utility holding companies, those supercorporations.
Citizens had seen one of these incredible colossi collapse during the spring of 1932, when the Chicagoan Samuel Insulls multibillion-dollar financial empire crashed.
Possibilities of controlling, with a minimum of capital, a half-dozen or so pyramided layers of big business suggested to Roosevelt a ninety-six-inch dog being wagged by a four-inch tail.
The Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 finally delivered a death sentence to this type of bloated growth, except where it might be deemed economically needful.
Inevitably, the sprawling electric-power industry attracted the fire of New Deal reformers.
Within a few decades, it had risen from nothingness to a behemoth with an investment of $13 billion.
As a public utility, it reached directly and regularly into the pocketbooks of millions of consumers for vitally needed services.
Ardent New Dealers accused it of gouging the public with excessive rates, especially since it owed its success to having secured, often for a song, priceless water-power sites from the public domain.
The tempestuous Tennessee River provided New Dealers with a rare opportunity.
With its tributaries, the river drained a badly eroded area about the size of England, and one containing some 2.5 million of the most poverty-stricken people in America.
The federal government already owned valuable properties at Muscle Shoals, where it had erected plants for needed nitrates in World War I. By developing the hydroelectric potential of the entire area, Washington could combine the immediate advantage of putting thousands of people to work with a long-term project for reforming the power monopoly.
An act creating the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was passed in 1933 by the Hundred Days Congress.
This far-ranging enterprise was largely a result of the steadfast vision and unflagging zeal of Senator George W. Norris of Nebraska, after whom one of the mighty dams was named.
From the standpoint of planned economy, the TVA was by far the most revolutionary of all the New Deal schemes.
This new agency was determined to discover precisely how much the production and distribution of electricity cost, so that a yardstick could be set up to test the fairness of rates charged by private companies.
Utility corporations lashed back at this entering wedge of government control, charging that the low cost of TVA power was due to dishonest bookkeeping and the absence of taxes.
Critics  MO.
ILLINOIS TENNESSEE KENTUCKY ALABAMA GEORGIA MISSISSIPPI VIRGINIA W. VA.
NORTH CAROLINA SOUTH CAROLINA TVA Area Only the nine dams on the Tennessee River are shown here.
More than twenty dams were constructed on the rivers tributaries as part of a massive project to control flooding, generate hydroelectric power, and revitalize the Tennessee Valley region, while also creating jobs for the unemployed.
The shaded area represents the area served by TVA electric power.
lack dust clouds rolled across the southern Great Plains in the 1930s, darkening the skies above a landscape already desolated by the Great Depression.
Its soil depleted by erosion, exhausted by overintensive farming, and parched by drought, the prairie of eastern Colorado, northern Texas, Kansas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and western Missouri became a dust bowl.
The thirsty land offered up neither crops nor livelihood to the sturdy people whose forebears had staked out homesteads there.
The desiccated earth exhaled only black dust and a dry wind that blew hundreds of thousands of people the so-called Okies and Arkiesout of the Dust Bowl forever.
They headed mainly for California, piling aboard buses, hopping freight trains, or buying space in westbound cars.
Most journeyed in their own autos, cramming their meager possessions into old jalopies and sputtering onto the highway.
But unlike the aimless, isolated Joad family of John Steinbecks classic novel  Dust Bowl migrants knew where they were headed.
Although many had lost everything in the depression, most knew relatives or friends who had migrated to California before the great crash and had sent back word about its abundant promise.
The earliest Okies had migrated under better circumstances in better times, and they often bragged of the good life in California.
In the two decades preceding the Great Depression, more than a million people had left the states of Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, and Missouri.
At least a quarter of them turned toward California, lured by advertisements that painted a life of leisure and plenty amid the palms.
Their ears so long filled with glowing reports from this earlier exodus, the Dust Bowl migrants refused to believe that the depression could sully the bright promise of California.
Not even an ominous sign posted by the state of California on the highway just west of Tulsa deterred them.
Indeed the billboard proclaimed its warning in vainNO JOBS in California .
If YOU are looking for work KEEP OUT.
Some Okies and Arkies made their way past the sign to California cities, but many of them favored the San Joaquin Valley, the southern part of central Californias agricultural kingdom.
The migrants chose it for its familiarity.
The valley shared much in common with the southern plainsarid climate, cotton growing, newfound oil deposits, and abundant land.
During the 1930s the San Joaquin Valley also proved all too familiar in its poverty; in 1939 the median income for migrants from the southern plains hovered just below the official poverty line.
Food, shelter, and clothing were scarce; the winter months, without work and without heat, proved nearly unendurable for the migrants.
John Steinbeck, writing in a San Francisco newspaper, exposed the tribulations of the Dust Bowl refugees: First the gasoline gives out.
And without gasoline a man cannot go to a job even if he could get one.
Then the food goes.
And then in the rains, with insufficient food, the children develop colds.
Eventually the Farm Security Administrationa New Deal agencyset up camps to house the Okies.
A fortunate few purchased land and erected makeshift homes, creating tiny Okievilles or Little Oklahomas.
During World War II, most Okies escaped the deprivation and uncertainty of seasonal farm labor, securing regular jobs in defense industries.
But the Okievilles remained, to form the bedrock of a still-thriving subculture in Californiaone that has brought the Dust Bowls country and western music, pecan pie, and evangelical religion to the Far West.
complained that the whole dream was creeping socialism in concrete.
But the New Dealers, shrugging off such outcries, pointed a prideful finger at the amazing achievements of the TVA.
The gigantic project brought to the area not only full employment and the blessings of cheap electric power, but low-cost housing, abundant cheap nitrates, the restoration of eroded soil, reforestation, improved navigation, and flood control.
Rivers ran blue instead of brown, and a once-poverty-cursed area was being transformed into one of the most flourishing regions in the United States.
Foreigners were greatly impressed with the possibilities of similar schemes in their own lands, and exulting New Dealers agitated  for parallel enterprises in the valleys of the Columbia, Colorado, and Missouri Rivers.
Federally built dams one day would span all those waterways, impounding more than 30 percent of the total annual runoff from the roof of America in the Rocky Mountains.
Hydroelectric power from those dams would drive the growth of the urban West, and the waters they diverted would nurture agriculture in the previously bone-dry western deserts.
But conservative reaction against the socialistic New Deal would confine the TVAs brand of federally guided resource management and comprehensive regional development to the Tennessee Valley.
The New Deal had meanwhile framed sturdy new policies for housing construction.
To speed recovery and better homes, Roosevelt set up the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) as early as 1934.
The building industry was to be stimulated by small loans to householders, both for improving their dwellings and for completing new ones.
So popular did the FHA prove to be that it was one of the  few alphabetical agencies to outlast the age of  Roosevelt.
Congress bolstered the program in 1937 by authorizing the United States Housing Authority (USHA)an agency designed to lend money to states or communities for low-cost construction.
Although units for about 650,000 low-income people were started, new building fell tragically short of needs.
New Deal efforts to expand the project collided with brick-wall opposition from real estate promoters, builders, and landlords (slumlords),  to say nothing of antiNew Dealers who attacked what they considered down-the-rathole spending.
Nonetheless, for the first time in a century, the slum areas in America ceased growing and even shrank.
Incomparably more important was the success of New Dealers in the field of unemployment insurance and old-age pensions.
Their greatest victory was the epochal Social Security Act of 1935one of the most complicated and far-reaching laws ever to pass Congress.
To cushion future depressions, the measure provided for federal-state unemployment insurance.
To provide security for old age, specified categories of retired workers were to receive regular payments from Washington.
These payments ranged from $10 to $85 a month (later raised) and were financed by a payroll tax on both employers and employees.
Provision was also made for the blind, the physically handicapped, delinquent children, and other dependents.
Republican opposition to the sweeping new legislation was bitter.
Social Security, insisted Hoover, must be builded upon a cult of work, not a cult of leisure.
The GOP national chairman falsely charged that every worker would have to wear a metal dog tag for life.
Social Security was largely inspired by the example of some of the more highly industrialized nations of Europe.
In the agricultural America of an earlier day, there had always been farm chores for all ages, and the large family had cared for its own dependents.
But in an urbanized economy, at the mercy of boom-or-bust cycles, the government was now recognizing its responsibility for the welfare of its citizens.
By 1939 over 45 million people were eligible for Social Security benefits, and in subsequent years further categories of workers were added and the payments to them were periodically increased.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 It was the presence of the cheap electricity, lower interest rates, water projects, that laid the foundation for the New South.
In contrast to Europe, where benefits generally were universal, American workers had to be employed to get coverage.
The NRA blue eagles, with their call for collective bargaining, had been a godsend to organized labor.
As New Deal expenditures brought some slackening of unemployment, labor began to feel more secure and hence more self-assertive.
A rash of walkouts occurred in the summer of 1934, including a paralyzing general strike in San Francisco (following a Bloody Thursday), which was broken only when outraged citizens resorted to vigilante tactics.
When the Supreme Court axed the blue eagle, a Congress sympathetic to labor unions undertook to fill the vacuum.
The fruit of its deliberations was the Wagner, or National Labor Relations, Act of 1935.
This trailblazing law created a powerful new National Labor Relations Board for administrative purposes and reasserted the right of labor to engage The inhuman high speed is  We now have a voice, and have slowed up the speed of the line.
And [we] are now treated as human beings, and not as part of the machinery.
The high pressure is taken off.
It proves clearly that united we stand, divided or alone we fall.
in self-organization and to bargain collectively through representatives of its own choice.
The Wagner Act proved to be one of the real milestones on the rocky road of the U.S.
labor movement.
Under the encouragement of a highly sympathetic National Labor Relations Board, a host of unskilled workers began to organize themselves into effective unions.
The leader of this drive was beetle-browed, domineering, and melodramatic John L. Lewis, boss of the United Mine Workers.
In 1935 he succeeded in forming the Committee for Industrial Organization (CIO) within the ranks of the skilled-craft American Federation of Labor.
But skilled workers, ever since the days of the ill-fated Knights of Labor in the 1880s, had shown only lukewarm sympathy for the cause of unskilled labor, especially blacks.
In 1936, following inevitable friction with the CIO, the older federation suspended the upstart unions associated with the newer  organization.
Undaunted, the rebellious CIO moved on a concerted scale into the huge automobile industry.
Late in 1936 the workers resorted to a revolutionary technique (earlier used in both Europe and America) known as the sit-down strike: they refused to leave the factory building of General Motors at Flint, Michigan, and thus prevented the importation of strikebreakers.
Conservative respecters of private property were scandalized.
The CIO finally won a resounding victory when its union, after heated negotiations, was recognized by General Motors as the sole bargaining agency for its employees.
Unskilled workers now pressed their advantage.
The United States Steel Company, hitherto an impossible nut for labor to crack, averted a costly strike when it voluntarily granted rights of unionization to its CIO-organized employees.
But the little steel companies fought back savagely.
Citizens were shocked in 1937 by the Memorial Day massacre at the plant of the Republic Steel Company in South Chicago.
In a bloody fracas, police fired upon pickets and workers, leaving the area strewn with several score dead and wounded.
A better deal for labor continued when Congress, in 1938, passed the memorable Fair Labor Standards Act (Wages and Hours Bill).
Industries involved in interstate commerce were to set up  minimum-wage and maximum-hour levels.
The eventual goals were forty cents an hour (later raised) and a forty-hour week.
Labor by children under sixteen (under eighteen if the occupation was dangerous) was forbidden.
These reforms were bitterly C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 though futilely opposed by many industrialists, especially by those southern textile manufacturers who had profited from low-wage labor.
But the exclusion of agricultural, service, and domestic workers meant that blacks, Mexican-Americans, and womenwho were concentrated in these fieldsdid not benefit from the act.
In later New Deal days, labor unionization thrived; Roosevelt wants you to join a union was the rallying cry of professional organizers.
The president received valuable support at ballot-box time from labor leaders and many appreciative working people.
One mill worker remarked that Roosevelt was the only man we ever had in the White House who would know that my boss is a s.o.b.
The CIO surged forward, breaking completely with the AF of L in 1938.
On that occasion the  reconstituted as the  zation idency of John L. Lewis.
By 1940 the CIO could claim about 4 million members in its constituent unions, including some 200,000 blacks.
Nevertheless, bitter and annoying jurisdictional feuding involving strikes continued with the AF of L. At times labor seemed more bent on costly civil war than on its age-old war with management.
As the presidential campaign of 1936 neared, the New Dealers were on top of the world.
They had achieved considerable progress, and millions of reliefers were grateful to their bountiful government.
The exultant Democrats renominated Roosevelt on a platform squarely endorsing the New Deal.
The Republicans were hard-pressed to find someone to feed to the Champ.
They finally settled on the colorless but homespun and honest governor of the Sunflower State of Kansas, Alfred M. Landon.
Landon himself was a moderate who accepted some New Deal reforms, although not the popular Social Security Act.
But the Republican platform vigorously condemned the New Deal of Franklin Deficit Roosevelt for its radicalism, experimentation, confusion, and frightful waste.
Backing Landon, ex-president Hoover called for a holy crusade for liberty, echoing the cry of the American Liberty League, a group of wealthy conservatives who had organized in 1934 to fight socialistic New Deal schemes.
Roosevelt gave as good as he got.
Angry enough to stretch sheet iron, the president took to the 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 1999 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Millions of members AF of L and CIO AF of L CIO INDEPENDENT UNIONS 4.4% Organized 95.6% Unorganized 34.7% Organized 14.0% Organized 65.3% Unorganized 86.0% Unorganized (CIO and AF of L merged in 1955) 1900 1954 1999 The Rise and Decline of Organized Labor, 19001999 The percentage of the total  labor force that was organized increased until 1954, and it has declined ever since.
(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics,) stump and denounced the economic royalists who sought to hide behind the flag and the Constitution.
I welcome their hatred, he proclaimed.
A landslide overwhelmed Landon, as the demoralized Republicans carried only two states, Maine and Vermont.
This dismal showing caused political wiseacres to make the old adage read, As Maine goes, so goes Vermont.
* The popular vote was 27,752,869 to 16,674,665; the electoral count was 523 to 8the most lopsided in 116 years.
Democratic majorities, riding in on Roosevelts magic coattails, were again returned to Congress.
Jubilant Democrats could now claim more than two-thirds of the seats in the House and a like proportion in the Senate.
The battle of 1936, perhaps the most bitter since Bryans defeat in 1896, partially bore out Republican charges of class warfare.
Even more than in 1932, the needy economic groups were lined up against the so-called greedy economic groups.
CIO units contributed generously to FDRs campaign chest.
Many left-wingers turned to Roosevelt, as the customary third-party protest vote sharply declined.
Blacks, several million of whom had also appreciated welcome relief checks, had by now largely shaken off their traditional allegiance to the Republican party.
To them, Lincoln was finally dead.
FDR won primarily because he appealed to the forgotten man, whom he never forgot.
Some of the presidents support was only pocketbook-deep: reliefers were not going to bite the hand that doled out the government checks.
No one, as Al Smith remarked, shoots at Santa Claus.
But Roosevelt in fact had forged a powerful and enduring coalition of the South, blacks, urbanites, and the poor.
He proved especially effective in marshaling the support of the multitudes of New Immigrants mostly the Catholics and Jews who had swarmed into the great cities since the turn of the century.
These once-scorned newcomers, with their nownumerous sons and daughters, had at last come politically of age.
In the 1920s one out of every twenty-five federal judgeships went to a Catholic; Roosevelt appointed Catholics to one out of every four.
Bowing his head to the sleety blasts, Roosevelt took the presidential oath on January 20, 1937, instead of the traditional March 4.
The Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution had been ratified in 1933.
(See the Appendix.
) It swept away the postelection lame duck session of Congress and shortened by six weeks the awkward period before inauguration.
Flushed with victory, Roosevelt interpreted his reelection as a mandate to continue New Deal reforms.
But in his eyes, the cloistered old men on the supreme bench, like fossilized stumbling blocks, stood stubbornly in the pathway of progress.
In nine major cases involving the New Deal, the Roosevelt administration had been thwarted seven times.
The Court was ultraconservative, and six of the nine oldsters in black were over seventy.
As luck would have it, not a single member had been appointed by FDR in his first term.
Roosevelt, his Dutch up, viewed with mounting impatience what he regarded as the obstructive conservatism of the Court.
Some of these Old Guard appointees were hanging on with a senile grip, partly because they felt it their patriotic duty to curb the socialistic tendencies of that radical in the White House.
Roosevelt believed that the voters in three successive electionsthe presidential elections of 1932 and 1936 and the midterm congressional elections of 1934had returned a smashing verdict in favor of his program of reform.
Democracy, in his view, meant rule by the people.
If the American way of life was to be preserved, Roosevelt C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 I should like to have it said of my first Administration that in it the forces of selfishness and of lust for power met their match.
I should like to have it said of my second Administration that in it these forces met their master.
*Maine, which traditionally held its state elections in September, was long regarded as a political weathervane.
Hence the expression, As Maine goes, so goes the nation.
argued, the Supreme Court ought to get in line with the supreme court of public opinion.
Roosevelt finally hit upon a Court scheme that he regarded as the answer to a maidens prayer.
In fact, it proved to be one of the most costly political misjudgments of his career.
When he sprang his brainstorm on a shocked nation early in 1937, he caught the country and Congress completely by surprise.
Roosevelt bluntly asked Congress for legislation to permit him to add a new justice to the Supreme Court for every member over seventy who would not retire.
The maximum membership could then be fifteen.
Roosevelt pointed to the necessity of injecting vigorous new blood, for the Court, he alleged, was far behind in its work.
This charge, which turned out to be false, brought heated accusations of dishonesty.
At best, Roosevelt was headstrong and not fully aware of the fact that the Court, in popular thinking, had become something of a sacred cow.
Congress and the nation were promptly convulsed over the scheme to pack the Supreme Court with a dictator bill, which one critic called too damned slick.
Franklin Double-crossing Roosevelt was vilified for attempting to break down the delicate checks and balances among the three branches of the government.
He was accused of grooming himself as a dictator by trying to browbeat the judiciary.
In the eyes of countless citizens, mostly Republicans but including many Democrats, basic liberties seemed to be in jeopardy.
God Bless the Supreme Court was a fervent prayer.
The Court had meanwhile seen the ax hanging over its head.
Whatever his motives, Justice Owen J. Roberts, formerly regarded as a conservative, began to vote on the side of his liberal colleagues.
A switch in time saves nine was the classic witticism inspired by this ideological change.
By a five to four decision, the Court, in March 1937, upheld the principle of a state minimum wage for women, thereby reversing its stand on a different case a year earlier.
In succeeding decisions a Court more sympathetic to the New Deal upheld the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act) and the Social Security Act.
Roosevelts Court-packing was further undermined when Congress voted full pay for justices over seventy who retired, whereupon one of the oldest conservative members resigned, to be replaced by a New Dealer, Justice Hugo Black.
Congress finally passed a court reform bill, but this watered-down version applied only to lower courts.
Roosevelt, the master politician, thus suffered his first major legislative defeat at the hands of his own party in Congress.
Americans have never viewed lightly a tampering with the Supreme Court by the president, no matter how popular their chief executive may be.
Yet in losing this battle, Roosevelt incidentally won his campaign.
The Court, as he had hoped, became markedly more friendly to New Deal reforms.
Furthermore, a succession of deaths and resignations enabled him in time to make nine appointments to the tribunalmore than any of his predecessors since George Washington.
The clock unpacked the Court.
Yet in a sense, FDR lost both the Court battle and the war.
He so aroused conservatives of both parties in Congress that few New Deal reforms were passed after 1937, the year of the fight to pack the bench.
With this catastrophic miscalculation, he squandered much of the political goodwill that had carried him to such a resounding victory in the 1936 election.
Roosevelts first term, from 1933 to 1937, did not banish the depression from the land.
Unemployment stubbornly persisted in 1936 at about 15 percent, down from the grim 25 percent of 1933 but still miserably high.
Despite the inventiveness of New Deal programs and the billions of dollars in pump priming, recovery had been dishearteningly modest, though the country seemed to be inching its way back to economic health.
Then in 1937 the economy took another sharp downturn, a surprisingly severe depression-withinthe-depression that the presidents critics quickly dubbed the Roosevelt recession.
In fact, government policies had caused the nosedive, as new Social Security taxes began to bite into payrolls and as the administration cut back on spending out of continuing reverence for the orthodox economic doctrine of the balanced budget.
Only at this late date did Roosevelt at last frankly and deliberately embrace the recommendations of the British economist John Maynard Keynes.
The New Deal had run deficits for several years, but all of them had been rather small and C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 Millions FDR'S ELECTION NEW DEAL RECOVER Y RECESSION WORLD WAR II BREAKS STOCK CRASH Unemployment, 19291942 These cold figures can only begin to suggest the widespread human misery caused by mass unemployment.
One man wrote to a newspaper in 1932, I am forty-eight; married twenty-one years; four children, three in school.
For the last eight years I was employed as a Pullman conductor.
Since September, 1930, they have given me seven months part-time work.
Today I am an object of charity.
My small, weak, and frail wife and two small children are suffering and I have come to that terrible place where I could easily resort to violence in my desperation.
none was intended.
Now, in April 1937, Roosevelt announced a bold program to stimulate the economy by planned deficit spending.
Although the deficits were still undersized for the herculean task of conquering the depression, this abrupt policy reversal marked a major turning point in the governments relation to the economy.
Keynesianism became the new economic orthodoxy and remained so for decades.
Roosevelt had meanwhile been pushing the remaining reform measures of the New Deal.
Early in 1937 he urged Congressa Congress growing more conservativeto authorize a sweeping reorganization of the national administration in the interests of streamlined efficiency.
But the issue became tangled up with his presumed autocratic ambitions in regard to the Supreme Court, and he suffered another stinging defeat.
Two years later, in 1939, Congress partially relented and in the Reorganization Act gave him limited powers for administrative reforms, including the key new Executive Office in the White House.
The New Dealers were accused of having the richest campaign chest in history, and in truth  government relief checks had a curious habit of coming in bunches just before ballot time.
To remedy such practices, which tended to make a farce of free elections, Congress adopted the much-heralded Hatch Act of 1939.
This act barred federal administrative officials, except the highest policy-making officers, from active political campaigning and soliciting.
It also forbade the use of government funds for political purposes as well as the collection of campaign contributions from people receiving relief payments.
The Hatch Act was broadened in 1940 to place limits on campaign contributions and expenditures, but I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished.
The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.
such clever ways of getting around it were found that on the whole the legislation proved disappointing.
By 1938 the New Deal had clearly lost most of its early momentum.
Magician Roosevelt could find few dazzling new reform rabbits to pull out of his tall silk hat.
In the congressional elections of 1938, the Republicans, for the first time, cut heavily into the New Deal majorities in Congress, though failing to gain control of either house.
The international crisis that came to a boil in 19381939 shifted public attention away from domestic reform and no doubt helped save the political hide of the Roosevelt spendocracy.
The New Deal, for all practical purposes, had shot its bolt.
Foes of the New Deal condemned its alleged waste, incompetence, confusion, contradictions, and cross-purposes, as well as the chiseling and graft  in the alphabetical agenciesalphabet soup, sneered Al Smith.
Roosevelt had done nothing, cynics said, that an earthquake could not have done better.
Critics deplored the employment of crackpot college professors, leftist pinkos, and outright Communists.
Such subversives, it was charged, were trying to make America over in the BolshevikMarxist image under Rooseveltski.
The Hearst newspapers lambasted, Roosevelt was further accused by conservatives of being Jewish (Rosenfield) and of tapping too many bright young Jewish leftists (The Jew Deal) for his Drain Trust.
Hardheaded businesspeople, who had met a payroll, were shocked by the leap-before-you-look, try-anything-once spirit of Roosevelt, the jolly improviser.
They accused him of confusing noise and movement with progress.
Others appreciated the presidents do-something approach.
Humorist Will Rogers, the rope-twirling poet lariat of the era, remarked that if Roosevelt were to burn down the Capitol, people would say, Well, we at least got a fire started, anyhow.
Bureaucratic meddling and regimentation were also bitter complaints of antiNew Dealers; in truth, bureaucracy did blossom.
The federal government, with its hundreds of thousands of employees, became incomparably the largest single business in the country, as the states faded further into the background.
Promises of budget balancing, to say nothing of other promises, had flown out the windowso foes of the New Deal pointed out.
The national debt  had stood at the already enormous figure of $19,487,000,000 in 1932 and had skyrocketed to $40,440,000,000 by 1939.
America was becoming, its critics charged, a handout state trying to squander itself into prosperity spending.
Such lavish benefactions were undermining the old virtues of thrift and initiative.
Ordinary Americans, once self-reliant citizens, were getting a bad case of the gimmies: their wishbones were becoming larger than their backbones.
In the nineteenth century, hard-pressed workers went west; now they went on relief.
Business was bitter.
Accusing the New Deal of fomenting class strife, conservatives insisted that the laborer and the farmerespecially the big  operatorwere being pampered.
Why soak the successful?
Countless businesspeople, especially Republicans, declared that they could pull themselves out of the depression if they could only get the federal governmentan interventionist big governmentoff their backs.
Private enterprise, they charged, was being stifled by planned economy, planned bankruptcy, creeping socialism, and the philosophy Washington can do it better, with a federal pill for every ill.
States rights were being ignored, while the government was competing in business with its own citizens, under a dictatorship of do-gooders.
The aggressive leadership of Rooseveltoneman supergovernmentalso came in for denunciation.
Heavy fire was especially directed at his attempts to browbeat the Supreme Court and to create a dummy Congress.
Roosevelt had even tried in the 1938 elections, with backfiring results, to purge members of Congress who would not lockstep with him.
The three senators whom he publicly opposed were all triumphantly reelected.
The most damning indictment of the New Deal was that it had failed to cure the depression.
Afloat in a sea of red ink, it had merely administered C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 aspirin, sedatives, and Band-Aids.
Many economists came to believe that better results would have been achieved by much greater deficit spending.
Despite some $20 billion poured out in six years of deficit spending and lending, of leaf raking and pump priming, the gap was not closed between production and consumption.
There were even more mountainous farm surpluses under Roosevelt than under Hoover.
Millions of dispirited men and women were still unemployed in 1939, after six years of drain, strain, and pain.
Not until World War II blazed forth in Europe was the unemployment headache solved.
The sensational increase in the national debt was caused by World War II, not the New Deal.
The national debt was only $40 billion in 1939 but $258 billion in 1945.
New Dealers staunchly defended their record.
Admitting that there had been some waste, they pointed out that reliefnot economyhad been the primary object of their multifront war on the depression.
Conceding also that there had been some graft, they argued that it had been trivial in view of the immense sums spent and the obvious need for haste.
Apologists for Roosevelt further declared that the New Deal had relieved the worst of the crisis in 1933.
It promoted the philosophy of balancing the human budget and accepted the principle that the federal government was morally bound to prevent mass hunger and starvation by managing the economy.
The Washington regime was to be used, not feared.
The collapse of Americas economic system was averted, a fairer distribution of the national income was achieved, and the citizens were enabled Governments can err; presidents do make mistakes, .
but better the occasional faults of a Government that lives in a spirit of charity than the consistent omissions of a Government frozen in the ice of its own indifference.
to regain and retain their self-respect.
Nobody is going to starve was Roosevelts promise.
Though hated by business tycoons, FDR should have been their patron saint, so his admirers claimed.
He deflected popular resentments against business and may have saved the American system of free enterprise.
Roosevelts quarrel was not with capitalism but with capitalists; he purged American capitalism of some of its worst abuses so that it might be saved from itself.
He may even have headed off a more radical swing to the left by a mild dose of what was mistakenly reviled as socialism.
The head of the American Socialist party, when once asked if the New Deal had carried out the Socialist program, reportedly replied that it had indeedon a stretcher.
Roosevelt, like Jefferson, provided bold reform without a bloody revolutionat a time in history when some foreign nations were suffering armed uprisings and when many Europeans were predicting either communism or fascism for America.
He was upbraided by the left-wing radicals for not going far enough, by the right-wing radicals for going too far.
Choosing the middle road, he has been called the greatest American conservative since Hamilton.
He was in fact Hamiltonian in his espousal of big government, but Jeffersonian in his concern for the forgotten man.
Demonstrating anew the value of powerful presidential leadership, he exercised that power to relieve the erosion of the nations greatest physical resourceits people.
He helped preserve democracy in America in a time when democracies abroad were disappearing down the sinkhole of dictatorship.
And in playing this role, he unwittingly girded the nation for its part in the titanic war that loomed on the horizona war in which democracy the world over would be at stake.
C HAPTER 34 The Great Depression and the New Deal, 19331939 Roosevelt defeats Hoover for presidency Bank holiday Emergency Banking Relief Act Beer and Wine Revenue Act The Hundred Days Congress enacts AAA, TVA, HOLC, NRA, and PWA Federal Securities Act Glass-Steagall Banking Reform Act CWA established Twentieth Amendment (changed calendar of congressional sessions and date of presidential inauguration) Twenty-first Amendment (prohibition repealed) Gold Reserve Act Securities and Exchange Commission authorized Indian Reorganization Act FHA established Frazier-Lemke Farm Bankruptcy Act WPA established Wagner Act Resettlement Administration Social Security Act Public Utility Holding Company Act CIO organized Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act Roosevelt defeats Landon for presidency USHA established Roosevelt announces Court-packing plan Second AAA Fair Labor Standards Act Reorganization Act Hatch Act he Great Depression was both a great calamity and a great opportunity.
How effectively Franklin Roosevelt responded to the calamity and what use he made of the opportunity are the two great questions that have animated historical debate about the New Deal.
Some historians have actually denied that there was much of a connection between the depression and the New Deal.
Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., for example, who believes in cycles of reform and reaction in American history, has written that there would very likely have been some sort of New Deal in the 1930s even without the Depression.
But most of the first generation of historians who wrote about the New Deal (in the 1940s, 1950s, and early 1960s) agreed with Carl Deglers judgment that the New Deal was a revolutionary response to a revolutionary situation.
In this view, though Roosevelt never found a means short of war to bring about economic recovery, he shrewdly utilized the stubborn economic crisis as a means to enact sweeping reforms.
A handful of scholars, notably Edgar Eugene Robinson, condemned Roosevelts record as a socialistic break with American traditions.
But until the 1960s, the great majority of historians approved the political values of the new Deal and praised its accomplishments.
Some leftist scholars writing in the 1960s, however, notably Barton J. Bernstein, charged that the New Deal did not reach far enough.
This criticism echoed the socialist complaint in the 1930s that the depression represented the total collapse of American capitalism, and that the New Deal had muffed the chance truly to remake American society.
Roosevelt had the chance, these historians argue, to redistribute wealth, improve race relations, and bring the giant corporations to heel.
Instead, say these critics, the New Deal simply represented a conservative holding action to shore up a sagging and corrupt capitalist order.
Those charges against the New Deal stimulated another generation of scholars in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s to look closely at the concrete institutional, attitudinal, and economic circumstances in which the New Deal unfolded.
Historians such as James Patterson, Alan Brinkley, Kenneth Jackson, Harvard Sitkoff, and Lizabeth Cohensometimes loosely referred to as the constraints schoolconclude that the New Deal offered just about as much reform as circumstances allowed and as the majority of Americans wanted.
The findings of these historians are impressive: the system of checks and balances limited presidential power; the disproportionate influence of southern Democrats in Congress stalled attempts to move toward racial justice; the federal system, in fact, inhibited all efforts to initiate change from Washington.
Most important, a majority of the American people at the time wanted to reform capitalism, not overthrow it.
Industrial workers, for example, were not hapless pawns upon whom the New Deal was foisted, frustrating their yearning for more radical change.
Instead they sought security and self-determination in ways quite compatible with the New Deals programs for unemployment insurance, old-age pensions, and guarantees of labors right to organize.
The best proof of the soundness of that conclusion is probably the durability of the political alliance that Roosevelt assembled.
The great New Deal coalition that dominated American politics for nearly four decades after Roosevelts election in 1932 represented a broad consensus in American society about the legitimate limits of government efforts to shape the social and economic order.
William Leuchtenburg has offered the most balanced historical assessment in his description of the New Deal as a half-way revolution, neither radical nor conservative, but accurately reflecting the American peoples needs and desires in the 1930s and for a long time thereafter.
For further reading, see page A23 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War  19331941 F RANKLIN D. R OOSEVELT , C HICAGO Q UARANTINE S PEECH , 1937 A mericans in the 1930s tried to turn their backs on the worlds problems.
Their president at first seemed to share these views.
The only battle Roosevelt sought was against the depression.
America had its own burdens to shoulder, and the costs of foreign involvement, whether in blood or treasure, simply seemed too great.
But as the clouds of war gathered over Europe, Roosevelt eventually concluded that the United States could no longer remain aloof.
Events gradually brought the American people around to his thinking: no nation was safe in an era of international anarchy, and the world could not remain halfenchained and half-free.
The sixty-six-nation London Economic Conference, meeting in the summer of 1933, revealed how thoroughly Roosevelts early foreign policy was subordinated to his strategy for domestic economic recovery.
The delegates to the London Conference hoped to organize a coordinated international attack on the global depression.
They were particularly eager to  stabilize the values of the various nations currencies and the rates at which they could be exchanged.
Exchange-rate stabilization was essential to the revival of world trade, which had all but evaporated by 1933.
Roosevelt at first agreed to send an American delegation to the conference, including Secretary of State Cordell Hull.
But the president soon began  to have second thoughts about the conferences agenda.
He wanted to pursue his gold-juggling and other inflationary policies at home as a means of stimulating American recovery.
An international agreement to maintain the value of the dollar in terms of other currencies might tie his hands, and at bottom Roosevelt was unwilling to sacrifice the  possibility of domestic recovery for the sake of  international cooperation.
While vacationing on a yacht along the New England coast, he dashed off a radio message to London, scolding the conference for attempting to stabilize currencies and essentially declaring Americas withdrawal from the  negotiations.
Roosevelts bombshell announcement yanked the rug from under the London Conference.
The delegates adjourned empty-handed, amid cries of American bad faith.
Whether the conference could have arrested the worldwide economic slide is debatable, but Roosevelts every-man-for-himself attitude plunged the planet even deeper into economic crisis.
The collapse of the London Conference also strengthened the global trend toward extreme nationalism, making international cooperation ever more difficult as the dangerous decade of the 1930s unfolded.
Reflecting the powerful persistence of American isolationism, Roosevelts action played directly into the hands of the power-mad dictators who were determined to shatter the peace of the world.
Americans themselves would eventually pay a high price for the narrow-minded belief that the United States could go it alone in the modern world.
Roosevelt matched isolationism from Europe with withdrawal from Asia.
The Great Depression burst the fragile bubble of President McKinleys imperialistic dream in the Far East.
With the descent into hard times, American taxpayers were eager to throw overboard their expensive tropical liability in the Philippine Islands.
Organized labor demanded the exclusion of low-wage Filipino workers, and American sugar producers clamored for the elimination of Philippine competition.
Remembering its earlier promises of freedom for the Philippines, Congress passed the TydingsMcDuffie Act in 1934.
The act provided for the independence of the Philippines after a twelve-year period of economic and political tutelagethat is, by 1946.
The United States agreed to relinquish its army bases, but naval bases were reserved for future discussionand retention.
In truth, the American people were not so much giving freedom to the Philippines as they were freeing themselves  eye to their own welfare, and with apparent disregard for the political situation in Asia, they proposed to leave the Philippines to their fate, while imposing upon the Filipinos economic terms so ungenerous as to threaten the islands with economic prostration.
Once again, American isolationists rejoiced.
Yet in Tokyo, Japanese militarists were calculating that they had little to fear from an inward-looking America that was abandoning its principal possession in Asia.
At the same time, Roosevelt made at least one internationalist gesture when he formally recognized the Soviet Union in 1933.
Over the noisy protests of anticommunist conservatives, as well as Roman Catholics offended by the Kremlins antireligious policies, Roosevelt extended the hand of diplomatic recognition to the sixteen-year-old Bolshevik regime.
He was motivated in part by the hope for trade with Soviet Russia, as well as by the desire to bolster the Soviet Union as a friendly counterweight to the possible threat of German power in Europe and Japanese power in Asia.
Closer to home, Roosevelt inaugurated a refreshing new era in relations with Latin America.
He proclaimed in his inaugural address, I would dedicate this nation to the policy of the Good Neighbor.
Taken together, Roosevelts noninvolvement in Europe and withdrawal from Asia, along with this brotherly embrace of his New World neighbors, suggested that the United States was giving up its ambition to be a world power and would content itself instead with being merely a regional power, its interests and activities confined exclusively to the Western Hemisphere.
Old-fashioned intervention by bayonet in the Caribbean had not paid off, except in an evil harvest of resentment, suspicion, and fear.
The Great Depression had cooled off Yankee economic aggressiveness, as thousands of investors in Latin American securities became sackholders rather than stockholders.
There were now fewer dollars to be protected by the rifles of the hated marines.
With war-thirsty dictators seizing power in Europe and Asia, Roosevelt was eager to line up the Latin Americans to help defend the Western Hemisphere.
Embittered neighbors would be potential tools of transoceanic aggressors.
President Roosevelt made clear at the outset that he was going to renounce armed intervention, particularly the vexatious corollary of the Monroe Doctrine devised by his cousin Theodore Roosevelt.
Late in 1933, at the Seventh Pan-American Conference in Montevideo, Uruguay, the U.S.
delegation formally endorsed nonintervention.
Deeds followed words.
The last marines departed from Haiti in 1934.
In the same year, restive Cuba was released from the hobbles of the  Platt Amendment, under which the United States had been free to intervene, although the naval base at Guantanamo was retained.
The tiny country of Panama received a similar uplift in 1936, when Washington relaxed its grip on the isthmus nation.
The hope-inspiring Good Neighbor policy, with the accent on consultation and nonintervention, received its acid test in Mexico.
When the Mexican government seized Yankee oil properties in 1938, American investors vehemently demanded armed intervention to repossess their confiscated businesses.
But Roosevelt successfully resisted the badgering, and a settlement was finally threshed out in 1941, even though the oil companies lost much of their original stake.
Spectacular success crowned Roosevelts Good Neighbor policy.
His earnest attempts to usher in a new era of friendliness, though hurting some U.S.
bondholders, paid rich dividends in goodwill among the peoples to the south.
No other citizen of the United States has ever been held in such high esteem in Latin America during his lifetime.
Roosevelt was cheered with tumultuous enthusiasm when, as a traveling salesman for peace, he journeyed to the special Inter-American Conference at Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1936.
The Colossus of the North now seemed less a vulture and more an eagle.
Intimately associated with Good Neighborism, and also popular in Latin America, was the reciprocal trade policy of the New Dealers.
Its chief architect was idealistic Secretary of State Hull, a high-minded Tennessean of the low-tariff school.
Like Roosevelt, he believed that trade was a two-way street, that a nation can sell abroad only as it buys abroad, that tariff barriers choke off foreign trade, and that trade wars beget shooting wars.
Responding to the Hull-Roosevelt leadership, Congress passed the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act in 1934.
Designed in part to lift American export trade from the depression doldrums, this enlightened measure was aimed at both relief and recovery.
At the same time, it activated the low-tariff policies of the New Dealers.
(See the tariff chart in the Appendix.
) C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act avoided the dangerous uncertainties of a wholesale tariff revision; it merely whittled down the most objectionable schedules of the Hawley-Smoot law by amending them.
Roosevelt was empowered to lower existing rates by as much as 50 percent, provided that the other country involved was willing to respond with similar reductions.
The resulting pacts, moreover, were to become effective without the formal approval of the Senate.
This novel feature not only ensured speedier action but sidestepped the twin evils of high-stakes logrolling and highpressure lobbying in Congress.
Secretary Hull, whose zeal for reciprocity was unflagging, succeeded in negotiating pacts with twenty-one countries by the end of 1939.
During these same years, U.S.
foreign trade increased appreciably, presumably in part as a result of the Hull-Roosevelt policies.
Trade agreements undoubtedly bettered economic and political relations with Latin America and proved to be an influence for peace in a war-bent world.
The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act was a landmark piece of legislation.
It reversed the traditional high-protective-tariff policy that had persisted almost unbroken since Civil War days and that had so damaged the American and international economies following World War I. It paved the way for the American-led free-trade international economic system that took shape after World War II, a period that witnessed the most robust growth in the history of international trade.
Post-1918 chaos in Europe, followed by the Great Depression, spawned the ominous spread of totalitarianism.
The individual was nothing; the state was everything.
The Communist USSR led the way, with the crafty and ruthless Joseph Stalin finally emerging as dictator.
Blustery Benito Mussolini, a swaggering Fascist, seized the reins of power in Italy during 1922.
And Adolf Hitler, a fanatic with a toothbrush mustache, plotted and harangued his way into control of Germany in 1933 with liberal use of the big lie.
Hitler was the most dangerous of the dictators, because he combined tremendous power with impulsiveness.
A frustrated Austrian painter, with hypnotic talents as an orator and a leader, he had secured control of the Nazi party by making political capital of the Treaty of Versailles and Germanys depression-spawned unemployment.
He was thus a misbegotten child of the shortsighted postwar policies of the victorious Allies, including the United States.
The desperate German people had fallen in behind the new Pied Piper, for they saw no other hope of escape from the plague of economic chaos and national disgrace.
In 1936 the Nazi Hitler and the Fascist Mussolini allied themselves in the RomeBerlin Axis.
International gangsterism was likewise spreading in the Far East, where imperial Japan was on the make.
Like Germany and Italy, Japan was a so-called have-not power.
Like them, it resented the ungenerous Treaty of Versailles.
Like them, it demanded additional space for its teeming millions, coopedup in their crowded island nation.
Japanese navalists were not to be denied.
Determined to find a place in the Asiatic sun, Tokyo gave notice in 1934 of the termination of the twelve-yearold Washington Naval Treaty.
A year later at London, the Japanese torpedoed all hope of effective naval disarmament.
Upon being denied complete parity, they walked out on the multipower conference and accelerated their construction of giant battleships.
Jut-jawed Mussolini, seeking both glory and empire in Africa, brutally attacked Ethiopia in 1935 with bombers and tanks.
The brave defenders, armed with spears and ancient firearms, were speedily crushed.
Members of the League of Nations could have caused Mussolinis war machine to creak to a haltif they had only dared to embargo oil.
But when the League quailed rather than risk global hostilities, it merely signed its own death warrant.
Isolationism, long festering in America, received a strong boost from these alarms abroad.
Though disapproving of the dictators, Americans still believed that their encircling seas conferred a kind of mystic immunity.
They were continuing to suffer the disillusionment born of their participation in World War I, which they now regarded as a colossal blunder.
They likewise nursed bitter memories of the ungrateful and defaulting debtors.
As early as 1934, a spiteful Congress passed the Johnson Debt Default Act, which prevented debtdodging nations from borrowing further in the United States.
If attacked again by aggressors, these delinquents could stew in their own juices.
Mired down in the Great Depression, Americans had no real appreciation of the revolutionary forces being harnessed by the dictators.
The have-not powers were out to become have powers.
Americans were not so much afraid that totalitarian aggression would cause trouble as they were fearful that they might be drawn into it.
Strong nationwide sentiment welled up for a constitutional amendment to forbid a declaration of war by Congress except in case of invasionunless there was a favorable popular referendum.
With a mixture of seriousness and frivolity, a group of Princeton University students began to agitate in 1936 for a bonus to be paid to the Veterans of Future Wars (VFW) while the prospective frontliners were still alive.
As the gloomy 1930s lengthened, an avalanche of lurid articles and books condemning the munitions manufacturers as war-fomenting merchants of death poured from American presses.
A Senate C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 To make a people great it is necessary to send them to battle even if you have to kick them in the pants.
(The Italians were notoriously unwarlike.
) We have buried the putrid corpse of liberty.
committee, headed by Senator Gerald Nye of North Dakota, was appointed in 1934 to investigate the blood business.
By sensationalizing evidence regarding Americas entry into World War I, the senatorial probers tended to shift the blame away from the German submarines onto the American bankers and arms manufacturers.
Because the munitions makers had obviously made money out of the war, many a naive citizen leaped to the illogical conclusion that these soulless scavengers had  war in order to make money.
This kind of reasoning suggested that if the profits could only be removed from the arms trafficone hell of a businessthe country could steer clear of any world conflict that might erupt in the future.
Responding to overwhelming popular pressure, Congress made haste to legislate the nation out of war.
Action was spurred by the danger that Mussolinis Ethiopian assault would plunge the world into a new bloodbath.
The Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937, taken together, stipulated that  war, certain restrictions would automatically go into effect.
No American could legally sail on a belligerent ship, sell or transport munitions to a belligerent, or make loans to a belligerent.
This head-in-the-sand legislation in effect marked an abandonment of the traditional policy of freedom of the seasa policy for which America had professedly fought two full-fledged wars and several undeclared wars.
The Neutrality Acts were specifically tailored to keep the nation out of a conflict like World War I. If they had been in effect at that time, America probably would not have been sucked inat least not in April 1917.
Congress was one war too late with its legislation.
What had seemed dishonorable to Wilson seemed honorable and desirable to a later disillusioned generation.
Storm-cellar neutrality proved to be tragically shortsighted.
America falsely assumed that the decision for peace or war lay in its own hands, not in those of the satanic forces already unleashed in the world.
Prisoner of its own fears, it failed to recognize that it might have used its enormous power to shape international events.
Instead it remained at the mercy of events controlled by the dictators.
Statutory neutrality, though of undoubted legality, was of dubious morality.
America served notice that it would make no distinction whatever between brutal aggressors and innocent victims.
By striving to hold the scales even, it actually overbalanced them in favor of the dictators, who had armed themselves to the teeth.
By declining to use its  vast industrial strength to aid its democratic friends and defeat its totalitarian foes, it helped goad the aggressors along their blood-spattered path of  conquest.
The Spanish Civil War of 19361939a proving ground and dress rehearsal in miniature for World War IIwas a painful object lesson in the folly of neutrality-by-legislation.
Spanish rebels, who rose against the left-leaning republican government in Madrid, were headed by fascistic General Francisco Franco.
Generously aided by his fellow conspirators Hitler and Mussolini, he undertook to overthrow the established Loyalist regime, which in turn was assisted on a smaller scale by the Soviet Union.
This pipeline from communist Moscow chilled the natural sympathies of many Americans, especially Roman Catholics.
Washington continued official relations with the Loyalist government.
In accordance with previous American practice, this regime should have been free to purchase desperately needed munitions from the United States.
But Congress, with the encouragement of Roosevelt and with only one dissenting vote, amended the existing neutrality legislation so as to apply an arms embargo to both Loyalists and rebels.
Roosevelt, remarked dictator Franco, behaved in the manner of a true gentleman.
FDR later regretted being so gentlemanly.
Uncle Sam thus sat on the sidelines while Franco, abundantly supplied with arms and men by his fellow dictators, strangled the republican government of Spain.
The democracies, including the United States, were so determined to stay out of war that they helped to condemn a fellow democracy to death.
In so doing they further encouraged the dictators to take the dangerous road that led over the precipice to World War II.
Such peace-at-any-price-ism was further cursed with illogic.
Although determined to stay out of war, America declined to build up its armed forces to a point where it could deter the aggressors.
In fact, it allowed its navy to decline in relative strength.
It had been led to believe that huge fleets caused huge wars; it was also trying to spare the complaining taxpayer during the grim days of the Great Depression.
When President Roosevelt repeatedly called for preparedness, he was branded a warmonger.
Not until 1938, the year before World War II exploded, did Congress come to grips with the problem when it passed a billion-dollar naval construction act.
The calamitous story was repeated of too little, too late.
Sulfurous war clouds had meanwhile been gathering in the tension-taut Far East.
In 1937 the Japanese militarists, at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing (Peking), touched off the explosion that led to an all-out invasion of China.
In a sense this attack was the curtain raiser of World War II.
Roosevelt shrewdly declined to invoke the recently passed neutrality legislation by refusing to call the China incident an officially declared  he had put the existing restrictions into effect, he would have cut off the trickle of munitions on which the Chinese were desperately dependent.
The Japanese, of course, could continue to buy mountains of war supplies in the United States.
In Chicagounofficial isolationist capital of AmericaPresident Roosevelt delivered his sensational Quarantine Speech in the autumn of 1937.
Alarmed by the recent aggressions of Italy and Japan, he called for positive endeavors to quarantine the aggressorspresumably by economic embargoes.
The speech triggered a cyclone of protest from isolationists and other foes of involvement; they feared that a moral quarantine would lead to a shooting quarantine.
Startled by this angry response, Roosevelt retreated and sought less direct means to curb the dictators.
Americas isolationist mood intensified, especially in regard to China.
In December 1937 Japanese aviators bombed and sank an American gunboat, the  two killed and thirty wounded.
In the days of 1898, when the  have provoked war.
But after Tokyo hastened to make the necessary apologies and pay a proper indemnity, Americans breathed a deep sigh of relief.
Japanese militarists were thus encouraged to vent their anger against the superior white race by subjecting American civilians in China, both male and female, to humiliating slappings and strippings.
Adolf Hitler meanwhile grew louder and bolder in Europe.
In 1935 he had openly flouted the Treaty of Versailles by introducing compulsory military service in Germany.
The next year he brazenly marched into the demilitarized German Rhineland, likewise contrary to the detested treaty, while France and Britain looked on in an agony of indecision.
Lashing his following to a frenzy, Hitler undertook to persecute and then exterminate the Jewish C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 The policy we should have adopted was to forbid the transportation of munitions of war in American bottoms [ships].
This could have been done and Loyalist Spain would still have been able to come to us for what she needed to fight for her life against Francoto fight for her life, Roosevelt concluded prophetically, and for the lives of some of the rest of us as well, as events will very likely prove.
population in the areas under his control.
In the end, he wiped out about 6 million innocent victims, mostly in gas chambers (see Makers of America: Refugees from the Holocaust, pp.
814815).
Calling upon his people to sacrifice butter for guns, he whipped the new German air force and mechanized ground divisions into the most devastating military machine the world had yet seen.
Suddenly, in March 1938, Hitler bloodlessly occupied German-speaking Austria, his birthplace.
The democratic powers, wringing their hands in despair, prayed that this last grab would satisfy his passion for conquest.
But like a drunken reveler calling for madder music and stronger wine, Hitler could not stop.
Intoxicated by his recent gains, he began to make bullying demands for the German-inhabited  Sudetenland of neighboring Czechoslovakia.
The leaders of Britain and France, eager to appease Hitler, sought frantically to bring the dispute to the conference table.
President Roosevelt, also deeply alarmed, kept the wires hot with personal messages to both Hitler and Mussolini urging a peaceful  settlement.
A conference was finally held in Munich, Germany, in September 1938.
The Western European democracies, badly unprepared for war, betrayed Czechoslovakia to Germany when they consented to the shearing away of the Sudetenland.
They hopedand these hopes were shared by the American peoplethat the concessions at the conference table would slake Hitlers thirst for power and bring peace in our time.
Indeed Hitler publicly promised that the Sudetenland is the last territorial claim I have to make in Europe.
Appeasement of the dictators, symbolized by the ugly word  render on the installment plan.
It was like giving a cannibal a finger in the hope of saving an arm.
In March 1939, scarcely six months later, Hitler suddenly erased the rest of Czechoslovakia from the map, contrary to his solemn vows.
The democratic world was again stunned.
Joseph Stalin, the sphinx of the Kremlin, was a  key to the peace puzzle.
In the summer of 1939,  the British and French were busily negotiating  with Moscow, hopeful of securing a mutual-defense treaty that would halt Hitler.
But mutual suspicions proved insuperable.
Then the Soviet Union astounded the world by signing, on August 23, 1939, a nonaggression treaty with the German dictator.
The notorious Hitler-Stalin pact meant that the Nazi German leader now had a green light to make war on Poland and the Western democracies, without fearing a stab in the back from the Soviet Unionhis Communist arch-foe.
Consternation struck those wishful thinkers in Western Europe who had fondly hoped that Hitler might be egged upon Stalin so that the twin menaces would bleed each other to death.
It was as plain as the mustache on Stalins face that the wily Soviet dictator was plotting to turn his German accomplice against the Western democracies.
The two warring camps would then kill each other off and leave Stalin bestriding Europe like a colossus.
With the signing of the Nazi-Soviet pact, World War II was only hours away.
Hitler now demanded from neighboring Poland a return of the areas wrested from Germany after World War I. Failing to secure satisfaction, he sent his mechanized divisions crashing into Poland at dawn on September 1, 1939. ed by Adolf Hitlers genocidal delusions, antiSemitism bared its fangs in the 1930s, spreading across Europe as Nazi Germany seized Austria and Czechoslovakia.
Eluding the jackboots of Hitlers bloodthirsty SS ( police force), Jews tried to flee from the Nazi juggernaut.
Some succeeded, including the worlds premier nuclear physicist, Albert Einstein, the Nobel laureate whose plea to Franklin Roosevelt helped initiate the top-secret atomic bomb project; the philosopher Hannah Arendt; the painter Marc Chagall; and the composer Kurt Weill.
In all, some 150,000 Jews fled the Third Reich for America in the 1930sa tiny fraction of the millions of Jews who eventually came under Hitlers heel.
Why did America not make room for more?
For one thing, those exiled luminaries who managed to make it out of Germany found a divided Jewish community in America.
Before the closing of unrestricted immigration in 1924, Jews had arrived in two stagesa trickle from Germany in the midnineteenth century, followed by a flood from Eastern Europe in the decades after 1890.
Both groups had migrated as families and without a thought of return to the old country.
But beyond that experience and their shared religious heritage, the two waves had relatively little in common, especially when it came to coping with the refugee crisis of the 1930s.
The settled and prosperous German-Jewish community, organized in the American Jewish Committee, had fought hard to convince their fellow Americans of their loyalty, and many now feared that bold advocacy for refugees from Hitlers Germany would touch off an outburst of anti-Semitism in America.
The notorious Radio Priest, Father Charles Coughlin, was already preaching venomous pronouncements against the Jews, though his audience remained smallfor the time being.
The more numerous but less wealthy and influential Eastern European Jews, organized in the American Jewish Congress, were intent on pressuring the Roosevelt administration to rescue Europes Jews.
This internal discord compromised the political effectiveness of the American Jewish community in the face of the refugee dilemma.
Other factors also helped to keep Americas doors shut against Jews seeking refuge in the United States.
The restrictive American immigration law of 1924 set rigid national quotas and made no provisions for seekers of asylum from racial, religious, or political persecution.
The Great Depression made it impossible to provide employment for workers already in the United States, much less make room in the job line for newcomers.
And opening Americas gates to Germanys half-million Jews raised the daunting prospect that such action would unleash a deluge of millions more Jews from countries like Poland and Romania, which were advertising their eagerness to be rid of their Jewish populations.
No one, of course, yet knew just how fiendish a destiny Hitler was preparing for Europes Jews.
Many Jews and Gentiles alike, including Congressman Emmanuel Celler and Senator Robert Wagner, both of New York, nevertheless lobbied Roosevelts government to extend a welcoming hand to Jews seeking asylumto no avail.
In 1941 Congress rejected a Wagner bill to bring twenty thousand German-Jewish children to the United States outside the quota restrictions.
An even more desperate plan to settle refugees in Alaska also foundered.
Once the United States entered the war, the State Department went so far as to suppress early reports of Hitlers plan to exterminate all European Jewry.
After the Fhrers sordid final solution became known in America, the War Department rejected pleas to bomb the rail lines leading to the gas chambers.
Military officials maintained that a raid on the death camps like Auschwitz would divert essential military resources and needlessly extend the war.
Thus only a lucky few escaped the Nazi terror, while 6 million died in one of historys most ghastly testimonials to the human capacity for evil.
Britain and France, honoring their commitments to Poland, promptly declared war.
At long last they perceived the folly of continued appeasement.
But they were powerless to aid Poland, which succumbed in three weeks to Hitlers smashing strategy of terror.
Stalin, as prearranged secretly in his fateful pact with Hitler, came in on the kill for his share of old Russian Poland.
Long-dreaded World War II was now fully launched, and the long truce of 19191939 had come to an end.
President Roosevelt speedily issued the routine proclamations of neutrality.
Americans were overwhelmingly anti-Nazi and anti-Hitler; they fervently hoped that the democracies would win; they fondly believed that the forces of righteousness would triumph, as in 1918.
But they were desperately determined to stay out: they were not going to be suckers again.
Neutrality promptly became a heated issue in the United States.
Ill-prepared Britain and France urgently needed American airplanes and other weapons, but the Neutrality Act of 1937 raised a sternly forbidding hand.
Roosevelt summoned Congress in special session, shortly after the invasion of Poland, to consider lifting the arms embargo.
After six hectic weeks of debate, a makeshift law emerged.
The Neutrality Act of 1939 provided that henceforth the European democracies might buy American war materials, but only on a cash-and-carry basis.
This meant that they would have to transport the munitions in their own ships, after paying for them in cash.
America would thus avoid loans, war debts, and the torpedoing of American armscarriers.
While Congress thus loosened former restrictions in response to interventionist cries, it added others in response to isolationist fears.
Roosevelt was now also authorized to proclaim danger zones into which American merchant ships would be forbidden to enter.
Despite its defects, this unneutral neutrality law clearly favored the democracies against the dictatorsand was so intended.
As the British and French navies controlled the Atlantic, the European aggressors could not send their ships to buy Americas munitions.
The United States not only improved its moral position but simultaneously helped its economic position.
Overseas demand for war goods brought a sharp upswing from the recession of 19371938 and ultimately solved the decadelong unemployment crisis (see the chart on p.
800).
The months following the collapse of Poland, while France and Britain marked time, were known as the phony war.
An ominous silence fell on Europe, as Hitler shifted his victorious divisions from Poland for a knockout blow at France.
Inaction during this anxious period was relieved by the Soviets, who wantonly attacked neighboring Finland in an effort to secure strategic buffer territory.
The debt-paying Finns, who had a host of admirers in America, were speedily granted $30 million by an isolationist Congress for  resistance, Finland was finally flattened by the Soviet steamroller.
C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 Mr.
President, several German divisions are deep in Polish territory.
There are reports of bombers over the city of Warsaw.
Well, Bill, FDR replied, it has come at last.
God help us all.
When you start a war, what matters is not who is right, but who wins.
Close your hearts to pity.
Act with brutality.
Eighty million Germans must get what is their due.
Their existence must be made secure.
The stronger man is in the right.
An abrupt end to the phony war came in April 1940 when Hitler, again without warning, overran his weaker neighbors Denmark and Norway.
Hardly pausing for breath, the next month he attacked the Netherlands and Belgium, followed by a paralyzing blow at France.
By late June France was forced to surrender, but not until Mussolini had pounced on its rear for a jackals share of the loot.
In a pell-mell but successful evacuation from the French port of Dunkirk, the British managed to salvage the bulk of their shattered and partially disarmed army.
The crisis providentially brought forth an inspired leader in Prime Minister Winston Churchill, the bulldogjawed orator who nerved his people to fight off the fearful air bombings of their cities.
Frances sudden collapse shocked Americans out of their daydreams.
Stouthearted Britons, singing Therell Always Be an England, were all that stood between Hitler and the death of constitutional government in Europe.
If Britain went under, Hitler would have at his disposal the workshops, shipyards, and slave labor of Western Europe.
He might even have the powerful British fleet as well.
This frightening possibility, which seemed to pose a dire threat to American security, steeled the American people to a tremendous effort.
Roosevelt moved with electrifying energy and dispatch.
He called upon an already debt-burdened nation to build huge airfleets and a two-ocean navy, which could also check Japan.
Congress, jarred out of its apathy toward preparedness, within a year appropriated the astounding sum of $37 billion.
This figure was more than the total cost of fighting World War I and about five times larger than any New Deal annual budget.
Congress also passed a conscription law, approved September 6, 1940.
Under this measure Americas first peacetime draftprovision was made for training each year 1.2 million troops and 800,000 reserves.
The act was later adapted to the requirements of a global war.
The Latin American bulwark likewise needed bracing.
The Netherlands, Denmark, and France, all crushed under the German jackboot, had orphaned colonies in the New World.
Would these fall into German hands?
At the Havana Conference of 1940, the United States agreed to share with its twenty New World neighbors the responsibility of upholding the Monroe Doctrine.
This ancient dictum, hitherto unilateral, had been a bludgeon brandished only in the hated Yankee fist.
Now multilateral, it was to be wielded by twenty-one pairs of American handsat least in theory.
Before the fall of France in June 1940, Washington had generally observed a technical neutrality.
But now, as Britain alone stood between Hitler and  his dream of world domination, the wisdom of neutrality seemed increasingly questionable.
Hitler launched air attacks against Britain in August 1940, preparatory to an invasion scheduled for September.
For months the Battle of Britain raged in the air over the British Isles.
The Royal Air Forces tenacious defense of its native islands eventually led Hitler to postpone his planned invasion indefinitely.
During the precarious months of the Battle of Britain, debate intensified in the United States over what foreign policy to embrace.
Radio broadcasts from London brought the drama of the nightly German air raids directly into millions of American homes.
Sympathy for Britain grew, but it was not yet sufficient to push the United States into war.
Roosevelt faced a historic decision: whether to hunker down in the Western Hemisphere, assume a Fortress America defensive posture, and let the rest of the world go it alone; or to bolster beleaguered Britain by all means short of war itself.
Both sides had their advocates.
Supporters of aid to Britain formed propaganda groups, the most potent of which was the Committee to Defend America by Aiding the Allies.
Its argument was double-barreled.
To interventionists, it could appeal for direct succor to the British by such slogans as Britain Is Fighting Our Fight.
To the isolationists, it could appeal for assistance to the democracies by All Methods Short of War, so that the terrible conflict would be kept in faraway Europe.
The isolationists, both numerous and sincere, were by no means silent.
Determined to avoid American bloodshed at all costs, they organized the America First Committee and proclaimed, England Will Fight to the Last American.
They contended that America should concentrate what strength it had to defend its own shores, lest a victorious Hitler, after crushing Britain, plot a transoceanic assault.
Their basic philosophy was The Yanks Are Not Coming, and their most effective speechmaker was the famed aviator Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh, who, ironically, had narrowed the Atlantic in 1927.
Britain was in critical need of destroyers, for German submarines were again threatening to starve it out with attacks on shipping.
Roosevelt moved boldly when, on September 2, 1940, he agreed to transfer to Great Britain fifty old-model, four-funnel destroyers left over from World War I. In return, the British promised to hand over to the United States eight valuable defensive base sites, stretching from Newfoundland to South America.
These strategically located outposts were to remain under the Stars and Stripes for ninety-nine years.
Transferring fifty destroyers to a foreign navy was a highly questionable disposal of government property, despite a strained interpretation of existing legislation.
The exchange was achieved by a simple presidential agreement, without so much as a by your leave to Congress.
Applause burst from the aid-to-Britain advocates, many of whom had been urging such a step.
But condemnation arose from America Firsters and other isolationists, as well as from antiadministration Republicans.
Some of them approved the transfer but decried Roosevelts secretive and arbitrary methods.
Yet so grave was the crisis that the president was unwilling to submit the scheme to the uncertainties and delays of a full-dress debate in the Congress.
Shifting warships from a neutral United States to a belligerent Britain was, beyond question, a flagrant violation of neutral obligationsat least neutral obligations that had existed before Hitlers barefaced aggressions rendered foolish such old-fashioned concepts of fair play.
Public-opinion polls demonstrated that a majority of Americans were determined, even at the risk of armed hostilities, to provide the battered British with all aid short of war.
C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 A distracting presidential election, as fate decreed, came in the midst of this crisis.
The two leading Republican aspirants were round-faced and flatvoiced Senator Robert A. Taft of Ohio, son of the  ex-president, and the energetic boy wonder, lawyerprosecutor Thomas E. Dewey of New York.
But in one of the miracles of American political history, the Philadelphia convention was swept off its feet by a colorful latecomer, Wendell L. Willkie, a Germandescended son of Hoosier Indiana.
This dynamic lawyertousled-headed, long-lipped, broad-faced, and large-framedhad until recently been a Democrat and the head of a huge public utilities corporation.
A complete novice in politics, he had rocketed from political nothingness in a few short weeks.
His great appeal lay in his personality, for he was magnetic, transparently trustful, and honest in a homespun, Lincolnesque way.
With the galleries in Philadelphia wildly chanting We Want Willkie, the delegates finally accepted this political upstart as the only candidate who could possibly beat Roosevelt.
The Republican platform condemned FDRs alleged dictatorship, as well as the costly and confusing zigzags of the New Deal.
Willkie, an outspoken liberal, was opposed not so much to the New Deal as to its extravagances and inefficiencies.
Democratic critics branded him the rich mans Roosevelt and the simple barefoot Wall Street lawyer.
While the rumor pot boiled, Roosevelt delayed to the last minute the announcement of his decision to challenge the sacred two-term tradition.
Despite what he described as his personal yearning for retirement, he avowed that in so grave a crisis he owed his experienced hand to the service of his country and humanity.
The Democratic delegates in Chicago, realizing that only with the Champ could they defeat Willkie, drafted him by a technically unanimous vote.
Better a Third Term Than a ThirdRater was the war cry of many Democrats.
Burning with sincerity and energy, Willkie launched out upon a whirlwind, Bryanesque campaign in which he delivered over five hundred speeches.
At times his voice became a hoarse croak.
The country was already badly split between interventionists and isolationists, and Willkie might have widened the breach dangerously by a violent attack You have been a Democrat all your life.
I dont mind the church converting a whore, but I dont like her to lead the choir the first night.
on Roosevelts aid-to-Britain policies.
But seeing eye-to-eye with FDR on the necessity of bolstering the beleaguered democracies, he refrained from assailing the presidents interventionism, though objecting to his methods.
In the realm of foreign affairs, there was not much to choose between the two candidates.
Both promised to stay out of the war; both promised to strengthen the nations defenses.
Yet Willkie, with a mop of black hair in his eyes, hit hard at Rooseveltian dictatorship and the third term.
His enthusiastic followers cried, Win with Willkie, No Fourth Term Either, and Theres No Indispensable Man.
Roosevelt, busy at his desk with mounting problems, made only a few speeches.
Stung by taunts that he was leading the nation by the back door into the European slaughterhouse, he repeatedly denied any such intention.
His most specific statement was at Boston, where he emphatically declared, Your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign warsa pledge that later came back to plague him.
He and his supporters vigorously defended the New Deal as well as all-out preparations for the defense of America and aid to the Allies.
Roosevelt triumphed, although Willkie ran a strong race.
The popular total was 27,307,819 to 22,321,018, and the electoral count was 449 to 82.
This contest was much less of a walkaway than in 1932 or 1936; Democratic majorities in Congress remained about the same.
Jubilant Democrats hailed their triumph as a mandate to abolish the two-term tradition.
But the truth is that Roosevelt won in spite of the third-term handicap.
Voters generally felt that should war come, the experienced hand of the tried leader was needed at the helm.
Less appealing was the completely inexperienced hand of the well-intentioned Willkie, who had never held public office.
The time-honored argument that one should not change horses in the middle of a stream was strong, especially in an era of war-pumped prosperity.
Roosevelt might not have won if there had not been a war crisis.
On the other hand, he probably would not have run if foreign perils had not loomed so ominously.
In a sense, his opponent was Adolf Hitler, not Willkie.
By late 1940 embattled Britain was nearing the end of its financial tether; its credits in America were being rapidly consumed by insatiable war orders.
But Roosevelt, who had bitter memories of the wrangling over the Allied debts of World War I, was determined, as  he put it, to eliminate the silly, foolish, old dollar sign.
He finally hit on the scheme of lending or leasing American arms to the reeling democracies.
When the shooting was over, to use his comparison, the guns and tanks could be returned, just as ones next-door neighbor would return a garden hose when a threatening fire was put out.
But isolationist Senator C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 RooseveltDemocratic WillkieRepublican WASH.
8 ORE.
5 CALIF.
22 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
3 S.D.
4 KANSAS 9 OKLA.
11 MICH.
19 N.Y.
47 N.D.
4 MINN.
11 IOWA 11 NEBR.
7 MO.
15 ARK.
9 LA.
10 TEXAS 23 N.M.
3 MISS.
9 ALA.
11 GA.
12 FLA.
7 TENN.
11 N.C.
13 S.C.
8 VA.
11 W. VA.
8 PA.
36 OHIO 26 IND.
14 ILL.
29 WISC.
12 KY.
11 ME.
5 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
17 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
16 DEL.
3 MD.
8 Presidential Election of 1940  (with electoral vote by state) Willkie referred to Roosevelt only as the third-term candidate.
On election eve FDR hinted that communists and fascists were among Willkies supporters.
Despite these campaign conflicts, the two men respected each other.
FDR later asked Willkie to serve as his emissary abroad and even suggested that they run together on a coalition ticket in 1944.
Taft (who was reputed to have the finest mind in Washington until he made it up) retorted that lending arms was like lending chewing gum: You dont want it back.
Who wants a chewed-up tank?
The Lend-Lease Bill, patriotically numbered 1776, was entitled An Act Further to Promote the Defense of the United States.
Sprung on the country after the election was safely over, it was praised by the administration as a device that would keep the nation out of the war rather than drag it in.
The underlying concept was Send guns, not sons or Billions, not bodies.
America, so President Roosevelt promised, would be the arsenal of democracy.
It would send a limitless supply of arms to the victims of aggression, who in turn would finish the job and keep the war on their side of the Atlantic.
Accounts would be settled by returning the used weapons or their equivalents to the United States when the war was ended.
Lend-lease was heatedly debated throughout the land and in Congress.
Most of the opposition came, as might be expected, from isolationists  and anti-Roosevelt Republicans.
The scheme was assailed as the blank-check bill and, in the words of isolationist Senator Burton Wheeler, as the new Triple-A [Agricultural Adjustment Act] billa measure designed to plow under every fourth American boy.
Nevertheless, lend-lease was finally approved in March 1941 by sweeping majorities in both houses of Congress.
Lend-lease was one of the most momentous laws ever to pass Congress; it was a challenge hurled squarely into the teeth of the Axis dictators.
America pledged itself, to the extent of its vast resources, to bolster those nations that were indirectly defending it by fighting aggression.
When the gigantic operation ended in 1945, America had sent about $50 billion worth of arms and equipmentmuch more than the cost to the country of World War Ito those nations fighting aggressors.
The passing of lendlease was in effect an economic declaration of war; now a shooting declaration could not be very far around the corner.
By its very nature, the Lend-Lease Bill marked the abandonment of any pretense of neutrality.
It was no destroyer deal arranged privately by President Roosevelt.
The bill was universally debated, over drugstore counters and cracker barrels, from California all the way to Maine, and the sovereign citizen at last spoke through convincing majorities in Congress.
Most people probably realized that they were tossing the old concepts of neutrality out the window.
But they also recognized that they would play a suicidal game if they bound themselves by the oxcart rules of the nineteenth  centuryespecially while the Axis aggressors themselves openly spurned international obligations.
Lend-lease would admittedly involve a grave risk of war, but most Americans were prepared to take that chance rather than see Britain collapse and then face the diabolical dictators alone.
Lend-lease had the somewhat incidental result of gearing U.S.
factories for all-out war production.
The enormously increased capacity thus achieved helped save Americas own skin when, at long last, the shooting war burst around its head.
Hitler evidently recognized lend-lease as an unofficial declaration of war.
Until then, Germany SOVIET UNION SOVIET UNION UNITED STATES SOUTH AMERICA AFRICA EUROPE AUSTRALIA CHINA Main Flow of Lend-Lease Aid  (width of arrows indicates  relative amount) The proud  but desperate British prime minister, Winston Churchill, declared in early 1941, Give us the tools and we will finish the job.
Lend-lease eventually provided the British and other Allies with $50 billion worth of tools.
had avoided attacking U.S.
ships; memories of Americas decisive intervention in 19171918 were still fresh in German minds.
But after the passing of lend-lease, there was less point in trying to curry favor with the United States.
On May 21, 1941, the was torpedoed and destroyed by a German submarine in the South Atlantic, outside a war zone.
The sinkings had started, but on a limited scale.
Two globe-shaking events marked the course of World War II before the assault on Pearl Harbor in December 1941.
One was the fall of France in June 1940; the other was Hitlers invasion of the Soviet Union, almost exactly one year later, in June 1941.
The scheming dictators Hitler and Stalin had been uneasy yoke-fellows under the ill-begotten Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939.
As masters of the double cross, neither trusted the other.
They engaged in prolonged dickering in a secret attempt to divide potential territorial spoils between them, but Stalin balked at dominant German control of the Balkans.
Hitler thereupon decided to crush his coconspirator, seize the oil and other resources of the Soviet Union, and then have two free hands to snuff out Britain.
He assumed that his invincible armies would subdue Stalins Mongol half-wits in a few short weeks.
Out of a clear sky, on June 22, 1941, Hitler launched a devastating attack on his Soviet neighbor.
This timely assault was an incredible stroke of good fortune for the democratic worldor so it seemed at the time.
The two fiends could now slit each others throats on the icy steppes of Russia.
Or they would if the Soviets did not quickly collapse, as many military experts predicted.
C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 If we see that Germany is winning, we ought to help Russia, and if we see Russia is winning, we ought to help Germany, and that way let them kill as many as possible.
Sound American strategy seemed to dictate speedy aid to Moscow while it was still afloat.
Roosevelt immediately promised assistance and backed up his words by making some military supplies available.
Several months later, interpreting the lend-lease law to mean that the defense of the USSR was now essential for the defense of the United States, he extended $1 billion in lend-leasethe first installment on an ultimate total of $11 billion.
Meanwhile, the valor of the red army, combined with the white paralysis of an early Russian winter, had halted Hitlers invaders at the gates of Moscow.
With the surrender of the Soviet Union still a dread possibility, the drama-charged Atlantic Conference was held in August 1941.
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, with cigar embedded in his cherubic face, secretly met with Roosevelt on a warship off the foggy coast of Newfoundland.
This was the first of a series of history-making conferences between the two statesmen for the discussion of common problems, including the menace of Japan in the Far East.
The most memorable offspring of this gettogether was the eight-point Atlantic Charter.
It was formally accepted by Roosevelt and Churchill and endorsed by the Soviet Union later that year.
Suggestive of Wilsons Fourteen Points, the new covenant outlined the aspirations of the democracies for a better world at wars end.
Surprisingly, the Atlantic Charter was rather specific.
While opposing imperialistic annexations, it promised that there would be no territorial changes contrary to the wishes of the inhabitants (self-determination).
It further affirmed the right of a people to choose their own form of government and, in particular, to regain the governments abolished by the dictators.
Among various other goals, the charter declared for disarmament and a peace of security, pending a permanent system of general security (a new League of Nations).
Liberals the world over took heart from the Atlantic Charter, as they had taken heart from Wilsons comparable Fourteen Points.
It was especially gratifying to subject populations, like the Poles, who were then ground under the iron heel of a conqueror.
But the agreement was roundly condemned in the United States by isolationists and others hostile to Roosevelt.
What right, they charged, had neutral America to confer with belligerent Britain on common policies?
Such critics missed the point: the nation was in fact no longer neutral.
Lend-lease shipments of arms to Britain on British ships were bound to be sunk by German wolf-pack submarines.
If the intent was to get the munitions to England, not to dump them into the ocean, the freighters would have to be escorted by U.S.
warships.
Britain simply did not have enough destroyers.
The dangerous possibility of being convoyed into war had been mentioned in Congress during the lengthy debate on lend-lease, but administration spokespeople had brushed the idea aside.
Their strategy was to make only one commitment at a time.
Roosevelt made the fateful decision to convoy in July 1941.
By virtue of his authority as commander in chief of the armed forces, the president issued orders to the navy to escort lend-lease shipments as far as Iceland.
The British would then shepherd them the rest of the way.
Inevitable clashes with submarines ensued on the Iceland run, even though Hitlers orders were to strike at American warships only in self-defense.
In September 1941 the U.S.
destroyer  tively trailing a German U-boat, was attacked by the undersea craft, without damage to either side.
Roosevelt then proclaimed a shoot-on-sight policy.
On October 17 the escorting destroyer  engaged in a battle with U-boats, lost eleven men when it was crippled but not sent to the bottom.
Two weeks later the destroyer  pedoed and sunk off southwestern Iceland, with the loss of more than a hundred officers and enlisted men.
Neutrality was still inscribed on the statute books, but not in American hearts.
Congress, responding to public pressures and confronted with a shooting war, voted in mid-November 1941 to pull the teeth from the now-useless Neutrality Act of 1939.
Merchant ships could henceforth be legally armed, and they could enter the combat zones with munitions for Britain.
Americans braced themselves for wholesale attacks by Hitlers submarines.
The blowup came not in the Atlantic, but in the faraway Pacific.
This explosion should have surprised no close observer, for Japan, since September 1940, had been a formal military ally of Nazi Germany Americas shooting foe in the North Atlantic.
Japans position in the Far East had grown more perilous by the hour.
It was still mired down in the costly and exhausting China incident, from which it could extract neither honor nor victory.
Its war machine was fatally dependent on immense shipments of steel, scrap iron, oil, and aviation gasoline from the United States.
Such assistance to the Japanese aggressor was highly unpopular in America.
But Roosevelt had resolutely held off an embargo, lest he goad the Tokyo warlords into a descent upon the oil-rich but defense-poor Dutch East Indies.
Washington, late in 1940, finally imposed the first of its embargoes on Japan-bound supplies.
This blow was followed in mid-1941 by a freezing of Japanese assets in the United States and a cessation of all shipments of gasoline and other sinews of war.
As the oil gauge dropped, the squeeze on Japan grew steadily more nerve-racking.
Japanese leaders were faced with two painful alternatives.
They could either knuckle under to the Americans or break out of the embargo ring by a desperate attack on the oil supplies and other riches of Southeast Asia.
Final tense negotiations with Japan took place in Washington during November and early December of 1941.
The State Department insisted that the Japanese clear out of China, but to sweeten the pill offered to renew trade relations on a limited basis.
Japanese imperialists, after waging a bitter war against the Chinese for more than four years, were unwilling to lose face by withdrawing at the behest of the United States.
Faced with capitulation or continued conquest, they chose the sword.
Officials in Washington, having cracked the top-secret code of the Japanese, knew that Tokyos decision was for war.
But the United States, as a democracy committed to public debate and action by Congress, could not shoot first.
Roosevelt, misled by Japanese ship movements in the Far East, evidently expected the blow to fall on British Malaya or on the Philippines.
No one in high authority in Washington seems to have believed that the Japanese were either strong enough or foolhardy enough to strike Hawaii.
But the paralyzing blow struck Pearl Harbor, while Tokyo was deliberately prolonging negotiations in Washington.
Japanese bombers, winging in from distant aircraft carriers, attacked without warning on the Black Sunday morning of December 7, 1941.
It was a date, as Roosevelt told Congress, which will live in infamy.
About three thousand casualties were inflicted on American personnel, many aircraft were destroyed, the battleship fleet was virtually wiped out when all eight of the craft were sunk or otherwise immobilized, and numerous small vessels were damaged or destroyed.
Fortunately for America, the three priceless aircraft  carriers happened to be outside the harbor.
An angered Congress the next day officially recognized the war that had been thrust upon the United States.
The roll call in the Senate and House fell only one vote short of unanimity.
Germany and Italy, allies of Japan, spared Congress the indecision of debate by declaring war on December 11, 1941.
This challenge was formally accepted on the same day by a unanimous vote of both Senate and House.
The unofficial war, already of many months duration, was now official.
C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 Japans hara-kiri gamble in Hawaii paid off only in the short run.
True, the Pacific fleet was largely destroyed or immobilized, but the sneak attack aroused and united America as almost nothing else could have done.
To the very day of the blowup, a strong majority of Americans still wanted to keep out of war.
But the bombs that pulverized Pearl Harbor blasted the isolationists into silence.
The only thing left to do, growled isolationist Senator Wheeler, was to lick hell out of them.
But Pearl Harbor was not the full answer to the question of why the United States went to war.
This treacherous attack was but the last explosion in a long chain reaction.
Following the fall of France, Americans were confronted with a devils dilemma.
They desired above all to stay out of the conflict, yet they did not want Britain to be knocked out.
They wished to halt Japans conquests in the Far East conquests that menaced not only American trade and security but international peace as well.
To keep Britain from collapsing, the Roosevelt administration felt compelled to extend the unneutral aid that invited attacks from German submarines.
To keep Japan from expanding, Washington undertook to cut off vital Japanese supplies with embargoes that invited possible retaliation.
Rather than let democracy die and dictatorship rule supreme, most citizens were evidently determined to support a policy that might lead to war.
It did.
Yesterday, December 7, 1941a date which will live in infamythe United States of America was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the Empire of Japan.
C HAPTER 35 Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Shadow of War, 19331941 FDR torpedoes the London Economic  Conference United States recognizes the Soviet Union FDR declares Good Neighbor policy toward  Latin America Tydings-McDuffie Act provides for  Philippine independence on July 4,  1946 Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act Mussolini invades Ethiopia U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1935 U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1936 Spanish Civil War U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1937 Japan invades China Hitler seizes Austria Munich Conference Hitler seizes all of Czechoslovakia Nazi-Soviet pact World War II begins in Europe with Hitlers  invasion of Poland U.S.
Neutrality Act of 1939 Fall of France Hitler invades Denmark, Norway, the  Netherlands, and Belgium United States invokes first peacetime draft Havana Conference Battle of Britain Bases-for-destroyers deal with Britain FDR defeats Willkie for presidency Lend-Lease Act Hitler attacks the Soviet Union Atlantic Charter Japan attacks Pearl Harbor For further reading, see page A24 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  America in World War II  19411945 F RANKLIN D. R OOSEVELT , 1942 T he United States was plunged into the inferno of World War II with the most stupefying and humiliating military defeat in its history.
In the dismal months that ensued, the democratic world teetered on the edge of disaster.
Japans fanatics forgot that whoever stabs a king must stab to kill.
A wounded but still potent American giant pulled itself out of the mud of Pearl Harbor, grimly determined to avenge the bloody treachery.
Get Japan first was the cry that rose from millions of infuriated Americans, especially on the Pacific Coast.
These outraged souls regarded Americas share in the global conflict as a private war of vengeance in the Pacific, with the European front a kind of holding operation.
But Washington, in the so-called ABC-1 agreement with the British, had earlier and wisely adopted the grand strategy of getting Germany first.
If America diverted its main strength to the Pacific, Hitler might crush both the Soviet Union and Britain and then emerge unconquerable in Fortress Europe.
But if Germany was knocked out first, the combined Allied forces could be concentrated on Japan, and its daring game of conquest would be up.
Meanwhile, just enough American strength would be sent to the Pacific to prevent Japan from digging in too deeply.
The get-Germany-first strategy was the solid foundation on which all American military strategy was built.
But it encountered much ignorant criticism from two-fisted Americans who thirsted for revenge against Japan.
Aggrieved protests were also registered by shorthanded American commanders in the Pacific and by Chinese and Australian allies.
But President Roosevelt, a competent strategist in his own right, wisely resisted these pressures.
Given time, the Allies seemed bound to triumph.
But would they be given time?
True, they had on their side the great mass of the worlds population, but the wolf is never intimidated by the number of the sheep.
The United States was the mightiest military power on earthpotentially.
But wars are won with bullets, not blueprints.
Indeed America came perilously close to losing the war to the well-armed aggressors before it could begin to throw its full weight onto the scales.
Time, in a sense, was the most needed munition.
Expense was no limitation.
The overpowering problem confronting America was to retool itself for all-out war production, while praying that the dictators would not meanwhile crush the democracies.
Haste was all the more imperative because the highly skilled German scientists might turn up with unbeatable secret weapons, including rocket bombs and perhaps even atomic arms.
Americas task was far more complex and backbreaking than during World War I. It had to feed, clothe, and arm itself, as well as transport its forces to regions as far separated as Britain and Burma.
More than that, it had to send a vast amount of food and munitions to its hard-pressed allies, who stretched all the way from the USSR to Australia.
Could the American people, reputedly gone soft, measure up to this Herculean task?
Was democracy rotten and decadent, as the dictators sneeringly proclaimed?
National unity was no worry, thanks to the electrifying blow by the Japanese at Pearl Harbor.
American Communists had denounced the Anglo-French imperialist war before Hitler attacked Stalin in 1941, but they now clamored for an unmitigated assault on the Axis powers.
The handful of strutting pro-Hitlerites in the United States melted away, while millions of Italian-Americans and GermanAmericans loyally supported the nations war program.
In contrast to World War I, when the patriotism of millions of immigrants was hotly questioned, World War II actually speeded the assimilation of many ethnic groups into American society.
Immigration had been choked off for almost two decades before 1941, and Americas ethnic communities were now composed of well-settled members, whose votes were crucial to Franklin Roosevelts Democratic party.
Consequently, there was virtually no government witch-hunting of minority groups, as had happened in World War I. C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 A painful exception was the plight of some 110,000 Japanese-Americans, concentrated on the Pacific Coast (see Makers of America: The Japanese, pp.
830831).
The Washington top command, fearing that they might act as saboteurs for Japan in case of invasion, forcibly herded them together in concentration camps, though about two-thirds of them were American-born U.S.
citizens.
This brutal precaution was both unnecessary and unfair, as the loyalty and combat record of Japanese-Americans proved to be admirable.
But a wave of postPearl Harbor hysteria, backed by the long historical swell of anti-Japanese prejudice on the West Coast, temporarily robbed many Americans of their good senseand their sense of justice.
The internment camps deprived these uprooted Americans of dignity and basic rights; the internees also lost hundreds of millions of dollars in property and foregone earnings.
The wartime Supreme Court in 1944 upheld the constitutionality of the Japanese relocation in  decades later, in 1988, the U.S.
government officially apologized for its actions and approved the payment of reparations of $20,000 to each camp  survivor.
The war prompted other changes in the American mood.
Many programs of the once-popular New Dealincluding the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Works Progress Administration, and the National Youth Administrationwere wiped out by the conservative Congress elected in 1942.
Roosevelt declared in 1943 that Dr.
New Deal was going into retirement, to be replaced by Dr.
Winthe-War.
His announcement acknowledged not only the urgency of the war effort but the power of the revitalized conservative forces in the country.
The era of New Deal reform was over.
World War II was no idealistic crusade, as World War I had been.
The Washington government did make some effort to propagandize at home and abroad with the Atlantic Charter, but the accent was on action.
Opinion polls in 1942 revealed that nine out of ten Americans could cite no provisions of the Atlantic Charter.
A majority then, and a nearmajority two years later, confessed to having no In anger, Henry and I read and reread the Executive Order.
Henry crumbled the newspaper in his hand and threw it against the wall.
Doesnt my citizenship mean a single blessed thing to anyone?
Why doesnt somebody make up my mind for me?
First they want me in the army.
Now theyre going to slap an alien 4-C on me because of my ancestry.
Once more I felt like a despised, pathetic two-headed freak, a Japanese and an American, neither of which seemed to be doing me any good.
n 1853 the American commodore Matthew Perry sailed four gunboats into Japans Uraga Bay and demanded that the nation open itself to diplomatic and commercial exchange with the United States.
Perrys arrival ended two centuries of Japans selfimposed isolation and eventually led to the overthrow of the last Japanese shogun (military ruler) and the restoration of the emperor.
Within two decades of Perrys arrival, Japans new Meiji government had launched the nation on an ambitious program of industrialization and militarization designed to make it the economic and political equal of the Western powers.
As Japan rapidly modernized, its citizens increasingly took ship for America.
A steep land tax imposed by the Meiji government to pay for its reforms drove more than 300,000 Japanese farmers off their land.
In 1884 the Meiji government permitted Hawaiian planters to recruit contract laborers from among this displaced population.
By the 1890s many Japanese were sailing beyond Hawaii to the ports of Long Beach, San Francisco, and Seattle.
Between 1885 and 1924, roughly 200,000 Japanese migrated to Hawaii, and around 180,000 more ventured to the U.S.
mainland.
They were a select group: because the Meiji government saw overseas Japanese as representatives of their homeland, it strictly regulated emigration.
Thus Japanese immigrants to America arrived with more money than their European counterparts.
Also, because of Japans system of compulsory education, Japanese immigrants on average were better educated and more literate than European immigrants.
Women as well as men migrated.
The Japanese government, wanting to avoid the problems of an itinerant bachelor society that it observed among the Chinese in the United States, actively promoted womens migration.
Although most Japanese immigrants were young men in their twenties and thirties, thousands of women also ventured to Hawaii and the mainland as contract laborers or picture brides, so called because their courtship had consisted exclusively of an exchange of photographs with their prospective husbands.
Like many Chinese and European immigrants, most Japanese who came to America expected to stay only temporarily.
They planned to work hard for wages that were high by Japanese standards and then to return home and buy land.
In Hawaii most Japanese labored on the vast sugar cane plantations.
On the mainland they initially found migratory work on the railroads or in fish, fruit, or vegetable canneries.
A separate Japanese economy of restaurants, stores, and boardinghouses soon sprang up in cities to serve the immigrants needs.
From such humble beginnings, many Japaneseparticularly those on the Pacific Coast quickly moved into farming.
In the late nineteenth century, the spread of irrigation shifted California agriculture from grain to fruits and vegetables, and the invention of the refrigerated railcar opened hungry new markets in the East.
The Japanese, with centuries of experience in intensive farming, arrived just in time to take advantage of these developments.
As early as 1910, Japanese farmers produced 70 percent of Californias strawberries, and by 1940 they grew 95 percent of the states snap beans and more than half of its tomatoes.
One Japanese farmer, known as the Potato King, sent his children to Harvard and Stanford Universities and died in 1926 with an estate valued at $15 million.
But the very success of the Japanese proved a lightning rod for trouble.
On the West Coast, Japanese immigrants had long endured racist barbs and social segregation.
Increasingly, white workers and farmers, jealous of Japanese success, pushed for immigration restrictions.
Bowing to this pressure, President Theodore Roosevelt in 1908 negotiated the Gentlemens Agreement, under which the Japanese government voluntarily agreed to limit emigration.
In 1913 the California legislature denied Japanese immigrants already living in the United States the right to own land.
Legally barred from becoming citizens, Japanese immigrants (the Issei, from the Japanese word for  that their American-born children (the Nissei, from the Japanese word for  full benefits of their birthright.
Japanese parents encouraged their children to learn English, to excel in school, and to get a college education.
Many Nissei grew up in two worlds, a fact they often recognized by Americanizing their Japanese names.
Although education and acculturation did not protect the Nissei from the hysteria of World War II, those assets did give them a springboard to success in the postwar era.
clear idea what the war is about.
All Americans knew was that they had a dirty job on their hands and that the only way out was forward.
They went about their bloody task with astonishing efficiency.
The war crisis caused the drooping American economy to snap to attention.
Massive military orders over $100 billion in 1942 alonealmost instantly soaked up the idle industrial capacity of the stilllingering Great Depression.
Orchestrated by the War Production Board, American factories poured forth an avalanche of weaponry: 40 billion bullets, 300,000 aircraft, 76,000 ships, 86,000 tanks, and 2.6 million machine guns.
Miracle-man shipbuilder Henry J. Kaiser was dubbed Sir Launchalot for his prodigies of ship construction; one of his ships was fully assembled in fourteen days, complete with life jackets and coat hangers.
The War Production Board halted the manufacture of nonessential items such as passenger cars.
It assigned priorities for transportation and access to raw materials.
When the Japanese invasion of British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies snapped Americas lifeline of natural rubber, the government imposed a national speed limit and gasoline rationing in order to conserve rubber and built fiftyone synthetic-rubber plants.
By wars end they were far outproducing the prewar supply.
Farmers, too, rolled up their sleeves and increased their output.
The armed forces drained the farms of workers, but heavy new investment in agricultural machinery and improved fertilizers more than made up the difference.
In 1944 and 1945, blue-jeaned farmers hauled in recordbreaking billion-bushel wheat harvests.
These wonders of production also brought economic strains.
Full employment and scarce consumer goods fueled a sharp inflationary surge in 1942.
The Office of Price Administration eventually brought ascending prices under control with extensive regulations.
Rationing held down the consumption of critical goods such as meat and butter, though some black marketeers and meatleggers cheated the system.
The War Labor Board (WLB) imposed ceilings on wage increases.
Labor unions, whose membership grew from about 10 million to more than 13 million workers during the war, fiercely resented the governmentdictated wage ceilings.
Despite the no-strike pledges of most of the major unions, a rash of labor walkouts plagued the war effort.
Prominent among the strikers were the United Mine Workers, who several times were called off the job by their crusty and iron-willed chieftain, John L. Lewis.
Threats of lost production through strikes became so worrisome that Congress, in June 1943, passed the Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act.
This act authorized the federal government to seize and operate tied-up industries.
Strikes against any  government-operated industry were made a criminal offense.
Under the act, Washington took over the coal mines and, for a brief period, the railroads.
Yet C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 work stoppages, although dangerous, actually accounted for less than 1 percent of the total working hours of the United States wartime laboring force a record better than blockaded Britains.
American workers, on the whole, were commendably committed to the war effort.
The armed services enlisted nearly 15 million men in World War II and some 216,000 women, who were employed for noncombat duties.
Best known of these women in arms were the WAACs (army), WAVES (navy), and SPARs (Coast Guard).
As the draft net was tightened after Pearl Harbor, millions of young men were plucked from their homes and clothed in GI (government issue) outfits.
As the arsenal of democracy, the United States exempted certain key categories of industrial and agricultural workers from the draft, in order to keep its mighty industrial and food-producing machines humming.
But even with these exemptions, the draft left the nations farms and factories so short of personnel that new workers had to be found.
An agreement with Mexico in 1942 brought thousands of Mexican agricultural workers, called  border to harvest the fruit and grain crops of the West.
The  twenty years, becoming a fixed feature of the agricultural economy in many western states.
Even more dramatic was the march of women onto the factory floor.
More than 6 million women took up jobs outside the home; over half of them had never before worked for wages.
Many of them were mothers, and the government was obliged to set up some 3,000 day-care centers to care for Rosie the Riveters children while she drilled the fuselage of a heavy bomber or joined the links of a tank track.
When the war ended, Rosie and many of her sisters were in no hurry to put down their tools.
They wanted to keep on working and often did.
The war thus foreshadowed an eventual revolution in the roles of women in American society.
Yet the wars immediate impact on womens lives has frequently been exaggerated.
The great majority of American womenespecially those with husbands present in the home or with small children to care fordid not work for wages in the wartime economy but continued in their traditional roles.
In both Britain and the Soviet Union, a far greater percentage of women, including mothers, were pressed into industrial employment as the gods of war laid a much heavier hand on those societies than they did on the United States.
A poll in 1943 revealed that a majority of American women would not take a job in a war plant if it were offered.
At wars end, two-thirds of women war workers left the labor force.
Many of these were forced out of their jobs by employers and unions eager to reemploy returning servicemen.
But half of them told census takers that they quit their jobs voluntarily because of family obligations.
The immediate postwar period witnessed not a permanent widening of womens employment opportunities, but a widespread rush into suburban domesticity and the mothering of the baby boomers who were born by the tens of millions in the decade and a half after 1945.
America was destined to experience a  thoroughgoing revolution in womens status later in the postwar period, but that epochal change was only beginning to gather momentum in the war years.
C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 New York Mobile Denver Dallas Washington, D.C.
Detroit Houston Los Angeles San Diego San Francisco Memphis Fort Worth Baton Rouge Average population increase of fast-growing cities, 1940-1950 Over 400,000 200,000400,000 100,000200,000 50,000100,000 Internal Migration in the United States During World War II Few events in American history have  moved the American people about so massively as World War II.
The West and the South boomed, and  several war-industry cities grew explosively.
A majority of migrants from the South were blacks; 1.6  million African-Americans left the region in the 1940s.
(Source: United States Department of Labor,  Bureau of Labor Statistics.
) The war also proved to be a demographic cauldron, churning and shifting the American population.
Many of the 15 million men and women in uniform, having seen new sights and glimpsed new horizons, chose not to go home again at wars end.
War industries sucked people into boomtowns like Los Angeles, Detroit, Seattle, and Baton Rouge.
Californias population grew by nearly 2 million.
The South experienced especially dramatic changes.
Franklin Roosevelt had called the South the nations number one economic problem in 1938; when war came, he seized the opportunity to accelerate the regions economic development.
The states of the old  Confederacy received a disproportionate share of defense contracts, including nearly $6 billion of federally financed industrial facilities.
Here were the seeds of the postwar blossoming of the Sunbelt.
Despite this economic stimulus in the South, some 1.6 million blacks left the land of their ancient enslavement to seek jobs in the war plants of the West and North.
Forever after, race relations constituted a national, not a regional, issue.
Explosive tensions developed over employment, housing, and segregated facilities.
Black leader A. Philip Randolph, head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, threatened a massive Negro March on Washington in 1941 to demand equal opportunities for blacks in war jobs and in the armed forces.
Roosevelts response was to issue an executive order forbidding discrimination in defense industries.
In addition, the president established the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) to monitor compliance with his edict.
Blacks were also drafted into the armed forces, though they were still generally assigned to service branches rather than combat units and subjected to petty degradations such Why is it we Negro soldiers who are as much a part of Uncle Sams great military machine as any cannot be treated with equality and the respect due us?
The same respect which white soldiers expect and demand from us?
There is great need for drastic change in this mans Army!
How can we be trained to protect America, which is called a  when all around us rears the ugly head of segregation?
as segregated blood banks for the wounded.
But in general the war helped to embolden blacks in their long struggle for equality.
They rallied behind the slogan Double Vvictory over the dictators abroad and over racism at home.
Membership in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) shot up almost to the halfmillion mark, and a new militant organization, the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), was founded in 1942.
The northward migration of African-Americans accelerated after the war, thanks to the advent of the mechanical cotton pickeran invention whose impact rivaled that of Eli Whitneys cotton gin.
Introduced in 1944, this new mechanical marvel did the work of fifty people at about one-eighth the cost.
Overnight, the Cotton Souths historic need for cheap labor disappeared.
Their muscle no longer required in Dixie, some 5 million black tenant  farmers and sharecroppers headed north in the three decades after the war.
Theirs was one of the great migrations in American history, comparable in size to the immigrant floods from Ireland, Italy, and Poland.
Within a single generation, a near majority of African-Americans gave up their historic homeland and their rural way of life.
By 1970 half of  all blacks lived outside of the South, and  had become almost a synonym for  and scale of these changes jolted the migrants  and sometimes convulsed the communities that received them.
The war also prompted an exodus of Native Americans from the reservations.
Thousands of Indian men and women found war work in the major cities, and thousands more answered Uncle Sams call to arms.
More than 90 percent of Indians resided on reservations in 1940; six decades later more than half lived in cities, with a large concentration in southern California.
Some twenty-five thousand Native American men served in the armed forces.
Comanches in Europe and Navajos in the Pacific made especially valuable contributions as code talkers.
They transmitted radio messages in their native languages, which were incomprehensible to the Germans and the Japanese.
The sudden rubbing against one another of unfamiliar peoples produced some distressingly violent friction.
In 1943 young zoot-suitclad Mexicans and Mexican-Americans in Los Angeles were viciously attacked by Anglo sailors who cruised the streets in taxicabs, searching for victims.
Order was restored C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 only after the Mexican ambassador made an emotional plea, pointing out that such outbreaks were grist for Nazi propaganda mills.
At almost the same time, an even more brutal race riot that killed twentyfive blacks and nine whites erupted in Detroit.
Despite these ugly episodes, Americans on the home front suffered little from the war, compared to the peoples of the other fighting nations.
By wars end much of the planet was a smoking ruin.
But in America the war invigorated the economy and lifted the country out of a decade-long depression.
The gross national product vaulted from less than $100 billion in 1940 to more than $200 billion in 1945.
Corporate profits rose from about $6 billion in 1940 to almost twice that amount four years later.
(If you are going to try to go to war in a capitalist country, said Secretary of War Henry Stimson, you have to let business make money out of the process, or business wont work.
) Despite wage ceilings, overtime pay fattened pay envelopes.
Disposable personal income, even after payment of wartime taxes, more than doubled.
On December 7, 1944, the third anniversary of Pearl Harbor, Macys department store rang up the biggest sales day in its history.
Americans had never had it so goodand they wanted it a lot better.
When price controls were finally lifted in 1946, Americas pent-up lust to consume pushed prices up 33 percent in less than two years.
The rest of the world, meanwhile, was still clawing its way out from under the rubble of war.
The hand of government touched more American lives more intimately during the war than ever before.
The war, perhaps even more than the New Deal, pointed the way to the post-1945 era of biggovernment interventionism.
Every household felt the constraints of the rationing system.
Millions of men and women worked for Uncle Sam in the armed forces.
Millions more worked for him in  the defense industries, where their employers and unions were monitored by the FEPC and the WLB, and their personal needs were cared for by government-sponsored housing projects, day-care facilities, and health plans.
The Office of Scientific Research and Development channeled hundreds of millions of dollars into university-based scientific research, establishing the partnership between the government and universities that underwrote Americas technological and economic leadership in the postwar era.
The flood of war dollarsnot the relatively modest rivulet of New Deal spendingat last swept the plague of unemployment from the land.
War, not enlightened social policy, cured the depression.
As the postwar economy continued to depend dangerously on military spending for its health, many observers looked back to the years 19411945 as the origins of a warfare-welfare state.
300 250 200 150 50 0 1932 $16b Billions of dollars 1934 $19b 1936 $27b 1938 $33b 1940 $37b 1942 $42b 1944 $72b 1946 $201b 1948 $269b 1950 $252b 1930 $257b The National Debt, 19301950 Contrary to much popular mythology, it was World War II, not the New Deal, that first ballooned the national debt.
The debt accumulated to still greater amounts in the 1980s and 1990s (see table, p.
986).
(Source: ) The conflict was phenomenally expensive.
The wartime bill amounted to more than $330 billion ten times the direct cost of World War I and twice as much as  Roosevelt would have preferred to follow a pay-asyou-go policy to finance the war, but the costs were simply too gigantic.
The income-tax net was expanded to catch about four times as many people as before, and maximum tax rates rose as high as 90 percent.
But despite such drastic measures, only about two-fifths of the war costs were paid from current revenues.
The remainder was borrowed.
The national debt skyrocketed from $49 billion in 1941 to $259 billion in 1945.
When production finally slipped into high gear, the war was costing about $10 million an hour.
This was the price of victory over such implacable enemies.
Early successes of the efficient Japanese militarists were breathtaking: they realized that they would have to win quickly or lose slowly.
Seldom, if ever, has so much territory been conquered so rapidly with so little loss.
Simultaneously with the assault on Pearl Harbor, the Japanese launched widespread and uniformly successful attacks on various Far Eastern bastions.
These included the American outposts of Guam, Wake, and the Philippines.
In a dismayingly short time, the Japanese invader seized not only the British-Chinese port of Hong Kong but also British Malaya, with its critically important supplies of rubber and tin.
Nor did the Japanese tide stop there.
The overambitious soldiers of the emperor, plunging into the snake-infested jungles of Burma, cut the famed Burma Road.
This was the route over which the United States had been trucking a trickle of munitions to the armies of the Chinese generalissimo Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek), who was still resisting the Japanese invader in China.
Thereafter, intrepid American aviators were forced to fly a handful of war supplies to Jiang over the hump of the towering Himalaya mountains from the India-Burma  theater.
Meanwhile, the Japanese had lunged southward against the oil-rich Dutch East Indies.
The  jungle-matted islands speedily fell to the assailants after the combined British, Australian, Dutch, and American naval and air forces had been smashed at an early date by their numerically superior foe.
Better news came from the Philippines, which succeeded dramatically in slowing down the mikados warriors for five months.
The Japanese promptly landed a small but effective army, and General Douglas MacArthur, the eloquent and egotistical American commander, withdrew to a strong defensive position at Bataan, not far from Manila.
There about twenty thousand American troops, supported by a much larger force of ill-trained Filipinos, held off violent Japanese attacks until April 9, 1942.
The defenders, reduced to eating mules and monkeys, heroically traded their lives for time in the face of hopeless odds.
They grimly joked while vainly hoping for reinforcements: Before the inevitable American surrender, General MacArthur was ordered by Washington to depart secretly for Australia, there to head the resistance against the Japanese.
Leaving by motorboat and airplane, he proclaimed, I shall return.
After the battered remnants of his army had hoisted the white flag, they were treated with vicious cruelty in the infamous eighty-mile Bataan Death March to prisoner-of-war camps.
The island fortress of Corregidor, in Manila harbor, held out until May 6, C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 PHILIPPINES Manila Mariveles San Fernando Route of Bataan Death March, April, 1942 Corregidor and Bataan 1942, when it too surrendered and left Japanese forces in complete control of the Philippine  archipelago.
The aggressive warriors from Japan, making hay while the Rising Sun shone, pushed relentlessly southward.
They invaded the turtle-shaped island of New Guinea, north of Australia, and landed on the Solomon Islands, from which they threatened Australia itself.
Their onrush was finally checked by a crucial naval battle fought in the Coral Sea, in May 1942.
An American carrier task force, with Australian support, inflicted heavy losses on the victory-flushed Japanese.
For the first time in history, the fighting was all done by carrier-based aircraft, and neither fleet saw or fired a shot directly at the other.
Japan next undertook to seize Midway Island, more than a thousand miles northwest of Honolulu.
From this strategic base, it could launch devastating assaults on Pearl Harbor and perhaps force the weakened American Pacific fleet into destructive combatpossibly even compel the United States to negotiate a cease-fire in the Pacific.
An epochal naval battle was fought near Midway on June 36, 1942.
Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, a high-grade naval strategist, directed a smaller but skillfully maneuvered carrier force, under Admiral Raymond A. Spruance, against the powerful invading fleet.
The fighting was all done by aircraft, and the Japanese broke off action after losing four vitally important carriers.
Midway was a pivotal victory.
Combined with the Battle of the Coral Sea, the U.S.
success at Midway halted Japans juggernaut.
But the thrust of the Japanese into the eastern Pacific did net them Americas fog-girt islands of Kiska and Attu, in the Aleutian archipelago, off Alaska.
This easy conquest aroused fear of an invasion of the United States from the northwest.
Much American strength was consequently diverted to the defense of Alaska, including the construction of the Alcan Highway through Canada.
Yet the Japanese imperialists, overextended in 1942, suffered from victory disease.
Their appetites were bigger than their stomachs.
If they had only dug in and consolidated their gains, they would have been much more difficult to dislodge once the tide turned.
Following the heartening victory at Midway, the United States for the first time was able to seize the initiative in the Pacific.
In August 1942 American ground forces gained a toehold on Guadalcanal Island, in the Solomons, in an effort to protect the lifeline from America to Australia through the Southwest Pacific.
An early naval defeat inflicted by the Japanese shortened American supplies dangerously, and for weeks the U.S.
troops held on to the malarial island only by their fingernails.
After several desperate sea battles for naval control, the Japanese troops evacuated Guadalcanal in February 1943.
Japanese losses were 20,000, compared to 1,700 for the Americans.
That casualty ratio of more than ten to one, Japanese to American, persisted throughout the Pacific war.
American and Australian forces, under General MacArthur, meanwhile had been hanging on courageously to the southeastern tip of New Guinea, the last buffer protecting Australia.
The scales of war gradually began to tip as the American navy, including submarines, inflicted lethal losses on Japanese supply ships and troop carriers.
Conquest of the north coast of New Guinea was completed by August 1944, after General MacArthur had fought his way westward through tropical jungle hells.
This hard-won victory was the first leg on his long return journey to the Philippines.
The U.S.
Navy, with marines and army divisions doing the meat-grinder fighting, had meanwhile been leapfrogging the Japanese-held islands in the Pacific.
Old-fashioned strategy dictated that the American forces, as they drove toward Tokyo, should reduce the fortified Japanese outposts on their flank.
This course would have taken many bloodstained months, for the holed-in defenders were prepared to die to the last man in their caves.
The new strategy of island hopping called for bypassing some of the most heavily fortified Japanese posts, capturing nearby islands, setting up airfields on them, and then neutralizing the enemy bases through heavy bombing.
Deprived of essential supplies from the homeland, Japans outposts would slowly wither on the vineas they did.
Brilliant success crowned the American attacks on the Japanese island strongholds in the Pacific, where Admiral Nimitz skillfully coordinated the C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 United States Thrusts in the Pacific, 19421945 American strategists had to choose among four  proposed plans for waging the war against Japan: 1.
Defeating the Japanese in China by  funneling supplies over the Himalayan  hump from India.
Carrying the war into Southeast Asia  (a proposal much favored by the British,  who could thus regain Singapore).
Heavy bombing of Japan from  Chinese air bases.
Island hopping from the  South Pacific to within striking  distance of the Japanese home  islands.
This strategy, favored by  General Douglas MacArthur, was  the one finally emphasized.
efforts of naval, air, and ground units.
In May and August of 1943, Attu and Kiska in the Aleutians were easily retaken.
In November 1943 bloody Tarawa and Makin, both in the Gilbert Islands, fell after suicidal resistance.
In January and February 1944, the key outposts of the Marshall Islands group succumbed after savage fighting.
Especially prized were the Marianas, including Americas conquered Guam.
From bases in the Marianas, the United States new B-29 superbombers could carry out round-trip bombing raids on Japans home islands.
The assault on the Marianas opened on June 19, 1944, with what American pilots called the Great Marianas Turkey Shoot.
A combination of the combat superiority of the recently developed American Hellcat fighter plane and the new technology of the antiaircraft proximity fuse destroyed nearly 250 Japanese aircraft, with a loss of only 29 American planes.
The following day, in the Battle of the Philippine Sea, U.S.
naval forces sank several Japanese carriers.
The Japanese navy never recovered from these massive losses of planes, pilots, and ships.
After fanatical resistance, including a mass suicide leap of surviving Japanese soldiers and civilians from Suicide Cliff on Saipan, the major islands of the Marianas fell to the U.S.
attackers in July and August 1944.
With these unsinkable aircraft carriers now available, virtual round-the-clock bombing of Japan began in November 1944.
Early setbacks for America in the Pacific were paralleled in the Atlantic.
Hitler had entered the war with a formidable fleet of ultramodern submarines, which ultimately operated in wolf packs with frightful effect, especially in the North Atlantic, the Caribbean, and the Gulf of Mexico.
During ten months of 1942 more than 500 merchant ships were reported lost111 in June aloneas ship destruction far outran construction.
The tide of subsea battle turned with agonizing slowness.
Old techniques, such as escorting convoys of merchant vessels and dropping depth bombs from destroyers, were strengthened by air patrol, the newly invented technology of radar, and the bombing of submarine bases.
Keep Em Sailing was the motto of oil-begrimed merchant seamen, hundreds of whom perished as unsung heroes in icy seas.
Eventually Allied antisubmarine tactics improved substantially, thanks especially to British code-breakers, who had cracked the Germans Enigma codes and could therefore pinpoint the locations of the U-boats lurking in the North Atlantic.
Not until the spring of 1943 did the Allies clearly have the upper hand against the U-boat.
If they had not won the Battle of the Atlantic, Britain would have been forced under, and a second front could not have been launched from its island springboard.
Victory over the undersea raiders was nerverackingly narrow.
When the war ended, Hitler was about to mass-produce a fearsome new submarine one that could remain underwater indefinitely and cruise at seventeen knots when submerged.
Meanwhile, the turning point of the land-air war against Hitler had come late in 1942.
The British had launched a thousand-plane raid on Cologne in May.
In August 1942 they were joined by the American air force and were cascading bombs on German cities.
The Germans under Marshal Erwin Rommelthe Desert Foxhad driven eastward across the hot sands of North Africa into Egypt, perilously close to the Suez Canal.
A breakthrough would have spelled disaster for the Allies.
But late in October 1942, British general Bernard Montgomery delivered a withering attack at El Alamein, west of Cairo.
With the aid of several hundred hastily shipped American Sherman tanks, he speedily drove the enemy back to Tunisia, more than a thousand miles away.
On the Soviet front, the unexpected successes of the red army gave a new lift to the Allied cause.
In September 1942 the Russians stalled the German steamroller at rubble-strewn Stalingrad, graveyard The proud German Army has by its sudden collapse, sudden crumbling and breaking up  .
once again proved the truth of the saying, The Hun [German] is always either  at your throat or at your feet.
of Hitlers hopes.
More than a score of invading divisions, caught in an icy noose, later surrendered or were mopped up.
In November 1942 the resilient Russians unleashed a crushing counteroffensive, which was never seriously reversed.
A year later Stalin had regained about two-thirds of the bloodsoaked Soviet motherland wrested from him by the German invader.
Soviet losses were already staggering in 1942: millions of soldiers and civilians lay dead, and Hitlers armies had overrun most of the western USSR.
Anglo-American losses at this time could be counted only in the thousands.
By wars end, the grave had closed over some 20 million Soviets, and a great swath of their country, equivalent in the United States to the area from Chicago to the Atlantic seaboard, had been laid waste.
Small wonder that Kremlin leaders clamored for a second front to divert the German strength westward.
Many Americans, including FDR, were eager to begin a diversionary invasion of France in 1942 or 1943.
They feared that the Soviets, unable to hold out forever against Germany, might make a separate peace as they had in 1918 and leave the Western Allies to face Hitlers fury alone.
But British military planners, remembering their appalling losses in 19141918, were not enthusiastic about a frontal assault on German-held France.
It might end in disaster.
They preferred to attack Hitlers Fortress Europe through the soft underbelly of the Mediterranean.
Faced with British boot-dragging and a woeful lack of resources, the Americans reluctantly agreed to postpone a massive invasion of Europe.
An assault on French-held North Africa was a compromise second front.
The highly secret attack, launched in November 1942, was headed by a gifted and easy-smiling American general, Dwight D.
(Ike) Eisenhower, a master of organization and conciliation.
As a joint Allied operation ultimately involving some 400,000 men (British, Canadian, French, and chiefly American) and about 850 ships, the invasion was the mightiest waterborne effort up to that time in history.
After savage fighting, the remnants of the German-Italian army were finally trapped in Tunisia and surrendered in May 1943.
New blows were now planned by the Allies.
At Casablanca, in newly occupied French Morocco, President Roosevelt, who had boldly flown the Atlantic, met in a historic conference with Winston Churchill in January 1943.
The Big Two agreed to step up the Pacific war, invade Sicily, increase pressure on Italy, and insist upon an unconditional surrender of the enemy, a phrase earlier popularized by General Ulysses S. Grant during the Civil War.
Such an unyielding policy would presumably hearten the ultrasuspicious Soviets, who professed to fear separate Allied peace negotiations.
It would also forestall charges of broken armistice terms, such as had come after 1918.
Paradoxically, the tough-sounding unconditional surrender declaration was an admission of the weakness of the Western Allies.
Still unable in 1943 to mount the kind of second front their Soviet partner desperately demanded, the British and the Americans had little but words to offer Stalin.
Unconditional surrender proved to be one of the most controversial moves of the war.
The main C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 criticism was that it steeled the enemy to fight to a last-bunker resistance, while discouraging antiwar groups in Germany from revolting.
Although there was some truth in these charges, no one can prove that unconditional surrender either shortened or lengthened the war.
But by helping to destroy the German government utterly, the harsh policy immensely complicated the problems of postwar reconstruction.
The Allied forces, victorious in Africa, now turned against the not-so-soft underbelly of Europe.
Sicily fell in August 1943 after sporadic but sometimes bitter resistance.
Shortly before the conquest of the island, Mussolini was deposed, and Italy surrendered unconditionally soon thereafter, in September 1943.
President Roosevelt, referring to the three original Axis countriesGermany, Italy, and Japanjoked grimly that it was now one down and two to go.
But if Italy dropped out of the war, the Germans did not drop out of Italy.
Hitlers well-trained troops stubbornly resisted the Allied invaders now pouring into the toe of the Italian boot.
They also unleashed their fury against the Italians, who had turned their coats and declared war on Germany in October 1943.
Sunny Italy proceeded to belie its name, for in the snow-covered and mud-caked mountains of its elongated peninsula occurred some of the filthiest, bloodiest, and most frustrating fighting of the war.
For many months Italy appeared to be a dead end, as the Allied advance was halted by a seemingly impregnable German defense centered on the ancient monastery of Monte Cassino.
After a touchand-go assault on the Anzio beachhead, Rome was finally taken on June 4, 1944.
The tremendous crosschannel invasion of France begun two days later turned Italy into a kind of sideshow, but the Allies, limited in manpower, continued to fight their way slowly and painfully into northern Italy.
On May 2, 1945, only five days before Germanys official surrender, several hundred thousand Axis troops in Italy laid down their arms and became prisoners of war.
While the Italian second front opened the Mediterranean and diverted some German divisions from the blazing Soviet and French battle lines, it also may have delayed the main Allied invasion of Europe, from England across the English Channel to France, by many monthsallowing more time for the Soviet army to advance into Eastern Europe.
The Soviets had never ceased their clamor for an allout second front, and the time rapidly approached for Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin to meet in person to coordinate the promised effort.
Marshal Joseph Stalin, with a careful eye on Soviet military operations, balked at leaving Moscow.
President Roosevelt, who jauntily remarked in private, I can handle that old buzzard, was eager to confer with him.
The president seemed confident that Rooseveltian charm could woo the hardened conspirator of the Kremlin from his nasty communist ways.
Teheran, the capital of Iran (Persia), was finally chosen as the meeting place.
To this ancient city Roosevelt riskily flew, after a stopover conference in Cairo with Britains Churchill and Chinas Jiang Jieshi regarding the war against Japan.
At Teheran the discussions among Stalin, Roosevelt, and Churchillfrom November 28 to December 1, 1943progressed smoothly.
Perhaps the most important achievement was agreement on broad plans, especially those for launching Soviet attacks on Germany from the east simultaneously with the prospective Allied assault from the west.
Preparations for the cross-channel invasion of France were gigantic.
Britains fast-anchored isle virtually groaned with munitions, supplies, and troops, as nearly 3 million fighting men were readied.
Because the United States was to provide most of the Allied warriors, the overall command was entrusted to an American, General Eisenhower.
He had already distinguished himself in the North African and Mediterranean Campaigns, not only for his military capacity but also for his gifts as a conciliator of clashing Allied interests.
French Normandy, less heavily defended than other parts of the European coast, was pinpointed for the invasion assault.
On D-Day, June 6, 1944, the enormous operation, which involved some forty-six hundred vessels, unwound.
Stiff resistance was encountered from the Germans, who had been misled by a feint into expecting the blow to fall farther north.
The Allies had already achieved mastery of the air over France.
They were thus able to block reinforcements by crippling the railroads, while worsening German fuel shortages by bombing gasoline-producing plants.
C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 World War II in Europe and North Africa, 19391945 In late 1943 the Big Three wartime leadersBritains prime minister Winston Churchill, American president Franklin Roosevelt, and Soviet leader Marshal Joseph Stalingathered together for the first time.
They met amidst growing Soviet frustration with the British and the Americans for their failure thus far to open a second front against Germany in western Europe, while the Soviets continued to suffer horrendous losses in the savage fighting in eastern Europe.
American military planners were eager to open a second front as soon as possible, but the British, who would necessarily have to supply most of the troops until America was fully mobilized, balked.
Tension among the three leaders over the second front plancode-named OVERLORD, the operation that resulted in the Anglo-American invasion of Normandy on DDay, June 6, 1944is evident in this transcript of their discussions in the Iranian city of Teheran on November 28, 1943.
The excerpts printed here are actually taken from two separate accounts: one composed by the American diplomat and Roosevelts official translator Charles Bohlen, the other written by a military officer on behalf of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Both versions are published in  compilation of American diplomatic records since 1861.
The Soviets and the British also kept their own records of the Teheran meetings, giving historians remarkably rich sources with which to reconstruct the crucial negotiations and decisions that shaped wartime diplomacy.
Why might the history of diplomacy be so lavishly documented?
At this meeting, what were the principal objectives that each leader pursued?
How did each man address his task?
In what ways was the future of the war and the post-war worldhere foreshadowed?
Bohlen Minutes SECRET T HE P RESIDENT said as the youngest of the three present he ventured to welcome his elders.
He said he wished to welcome the new members to the family circle and tell them that meetings of this character were conducted as between friends with complete frankness on all sides with nothing that was said to be made public.
Chief of Staff Minutes M ARSHAL S TALIN asked who will be the commander in this Operation Overlord.
(T HE P RESIDENT and P RIME M INISTER interpolated this was not yet decided.
) M ARSHAL S TALIN continued, Then nothing will come out of these operations.
T HE P RESIDENT said we again come back to the problem of the timing for O VERLORD .
It was believed that it would be good for O VERLORD to take place about 1 May, or certainly not later than 15 May or 20 May, if possible.
T HE P RIME M INISTER said that he could not agree to that.
He said he (the Prime Minister) was going to do everything in the power of His Majestys Government to begin O VERLORD at the earliest possible moment.
However, he did not think that the many great possibilities in the Mediterranean should be ruthlessly cast aside as valueless merely on the question of a months delay in O VERLORD .
M ARSHAL S TALIN said all the Mediterranean operations are diversions, .
T HE P RESIDENT said he found that his staff places emphasis on O VERLORD .
While on the other hand the Prime Minister and his staff also emphasize O VER LORD , nevertheless the United States does not feel that O VERLORD should be put off.
T HE P RESIDENT questioned whether it would not be possible for the  their deliberations without any further directive and to produce an answer by tomorrow morning.
M ARSHAL S TALIN questioned, What can such a committee do?
He said, We Chiefs of State have more power and more authority than a committee.
General Brooke cannot force our opinions and there are many questions which can be decided only by us.
He said he would like to ask if the British are thinking seriously of O VERLORD only in order to satisfy the U.S.S.R.
T HE P RIME M INISTER replied that if the conditions specified at Moscow regarding O VERLORD should exist, he firmly believed it would be Englands duty to hurl every ounce of strength she had across the Channel at the Germans.
T HE P RESIDENT observed that in an hour a very good dinner would be awaiting all and people would be very hungry.
He suggested that the staffs should meet tomorrow morning and discuss the matter.
C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 The Allied beachhead, at first clung to with fingertips, was gradually enlarged, consolidated, and reinforced.
After desperate fighting, the invaders finally broke out of the German iron ring that enclosed the Normandy landing zone.
Most spectacular were the lunges across France by American armored divisions, brilliantly commanded by blustery and profane General George S.
(Blood n Guts) Patton.
The retreat of the German defenders was hastened when an American-French force landed in August 1944 on the southern coast of France and swept northward.
With the assistance of the French underground, Paris was liberated in August 1944, amid exuberant manifestations of joy and gratitude.
Allied forces rolled irresistibly toward Germany, and many of the Americans encountered places, like Chteau-Thierry, familiar to their fathers in 1918.
Lafayette, we are here again, quipped some of the American soldiers.
The first important German city (Aachen) fell to the Americans in October 1944, and the days of Hitlers thousand-year  were numbered.
The presidential campaign of 1944, which was bound to divert energy from the war program, came most awkwardly as the awful conflict roared to its climax.
But the normal electoral processes continued to function, despite some loose talk of suspending them for the duration.
Victory-starved Republicans met in Chicago with hopeful enthusiasm.
They quickly nominated the short, mustachioed, and dapper Thomas E. Dewey, popular vote-getting governor of New York.
Regarded as a liberal, he had already made a national reputation as a prosecutor of grafters and racketeers in New York City.
His shortness and youthhe was only forty-twohad caused one veteran New Dealer to sneer that the candidate had cast his diaper into the ring.
To offset Deweys mild internationalism, the convention nominated for the vice presidency a strong isolationist, handsome and white-maned Senator John W. Bricker of Ohio.
Yet the platform called for an unstinted prosecution of the war and for the creation of a new international organization to maintain peace.
FDR, aging under the strain, was the indispensable man of the Democrats.
No other major figure was available, and the war was apparently grinding to its finale.
He was nominated at Chicago on the first ballot by acclamation.
But in a sense he was the forgotten man of the convention, for in view of his age, an unusual amount of attention was focused on the vice presidency.
The scramble for the vice-presidential plum turned into something of a free-for-all.
Henry A. Wallace, onetime plow em under secretary of agriculture, had served four years as vice president and desired a renomination.
But conservative Democrats distrusted him as an ill-balanced and unpredictable liberal.
A ditch Wallace move developed tremendous momentum, despite the popularity of Wallace with large numbers of voters and many of the delegates.
With Roosevelts blessing, the vice-presidential nomination finally went to smiling and self-assured Senator Harry S Truman of Missouri (the new Missouri Compromise).
Hitherto inconspicuous, he had recently attained national visibility as the efficient chairman of a Senate committee conducting an investigation of wasteful war expenditures.
Nobody had much against him or  on him.
A dynamic Dewey took the offensive, for Roosevelt was too consumed with directing the war to spare much time for speechmaking.
The vigorous young crime buster, with his beautiful baritone voice and polished diction, denounced the tired and quarrelsome old men in Washington.
He proclaimed repeatedly that after twelve long years of New Dealism, it was time for a change.
As for the war, Dewey would not alter the basic strategy but would fight it bettera type of me-tooism ridiculed by the Democrats.
The fourth-term issue did not figure prominently, now that the ice had been broken by Roosevelts third term.
But Dewey-eyed Republicans half-humorously professed to fear fifth and sixth terms by the lifer in the White House.
In the closing weeks of the campaign, Roosevelt left his desk for the stump.
He was stung by certain Republican charges, including criticism that he had sent a U.S.
Navy destroyer to retrieve his pet Scottie dog, Fala.
He was also eager to show himself, even in chilling rains, to spike well-founded rumors of failing health.
Substantial assistance came from the new political action committee of the CIO, which was organized to get around the law banning the direct use of union funds for political purposes.
Zealous CIO members, branded as communists by the Republicans, rang countless doorbells and asked, with pointed reference to the recent depression, What were you doing in 1932?
At times Roosevelt seemed to be running again against Hoover.
As in every one of his previous three campaigns, FDR was opposed by a majority of the newspapers, which were owned chiefly by Republicans.
Roosevelt, as customary, won a sweeping victory: 432 to 99 in the Electoral College; 25,606,585 to 22,014,745 in the popular vote.
Elated, he quipped that the first twelve years are the hardest.
Roosevelt won primarily because the war was going well.
A winning pitcher is not ordinarily pulled from the game.
Foreign policy was a decisive factor with untold thousands of voters, who concluded that Roosevelts experienced hand was needed in fashioning a future organization for world peace.
The dapper Dewey, cruelly dubbed the little man on top of the wedding cake, had spoken smoothly of international cooperation, but his isolationist running mate, Bricker, had implanted serious doubts.
The Republican party was still suffering from the taint of isolationism fastened on it by the Hardingites.
By mid-December 1944, the month after Roosevelts fourth-term victory, Germany seemed to be wobbling on its last legs.
The Soviet surge had penetrated eastern Germany.
Allied aerial blockbuster bombs, making the rubble bounce with aroundthe-clock attacks, were falling like giant explosive hailstones on cities, factories, and transportation arteries.
The German western front seemed about to buckle under the sledgehammer blows of the United States and its Allies.
Hitler then staked everything on one last throw of his reserves.
Secretly concentrating a powerful force, he hurled it, on December 16, 1944, against the thinly held American lines in the heavily befogged and snow-shrouded Ardennes Forest.
His objective was the Belgian port of Antwerp, key to the Allied supply operation.
Caught off guard, the outmanned Americans were driven back, creating a deep bulge in the Allied line.
The ten-day penetration was finally halted after the 101st Airborne Division had stood firm at the vital bastion of Bastogne.
The commander, Brigadier General A. C. McAuliffe, defiantly answered the German demand for surrender with one word: Nuts.
Reinforcements were rushed up, and the last-gasp Hitlerian offensive was at length bloodily stemmed in the Battle of the Bulge.
In March 1945, forward-driving American troops reached Germanys Rhine River, where, by incredibly good luck, they found one strategic bridge undemolished.
Pressing their advantage, C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 [He] lied us into war because he did not have the political courage to lead us into it.
General Eisenhowers troops reached the Elbe River in April 1945.
There, a short distance south of Berlin, American and Soviet advance guards dramatically clasped hands amid cries of  Americans were horrified to find blood-spattered and still-stinking concentration camps, where the German Nazis had engaged in scientific mass murder of undesirables, including an estimated 6 million Jews.
The Washington government had long been informed about Hitlers campaign of genocide against the Jews and had been reprehensibly slow to take steps against it.
Roosevelts administration had bolted the door against large numbers of Jewish refugees, and his military commanders declined even to bomb the rail lines that carried the victims to the camps.
But until the wars end, the full dimensions of the Holocaust had not been known.
When the details were revealed, the whole world was aghast.
The vengeful Soviets, clawing their way forward from the east, reached Berlin in April 1945.
After desperate house-to-house fighting, followed by an orgy of pillage and rape, they captured the bombshattered city.
Adolf Hitler, after a hasty marriage to his mistress, committed suicide in an underground bunker on April 30, 1945.
Tragedy had meanwhile struck the United States.
President Roosevelt, while relaxing at Warm Springs, Georgia, suddenly died from a massive cerebral hemorrhage on April 12, 1945.
The crushing burden of twelve depression and war years in the White House had finally taken its toll.
Knots of confused, leaderless citizens gathered to discuss the future anxiously, as a bewildered, unbriefed Vice President Truman took the helm.
On May 7, 1945, what was left of the German government surrendered unconditionally.
May 8 was officially proclaimed V-E (Victory in Europe) Day and was greeted with frenzied rejoicing in the Allied countries.
Japans rickety bamboo empire meanwhile was tottering to its fall.
American submarinesthe silent servicewere sending the Japanese merchant Battle of the Bulge,  December 1944January 1945 marine to the bottom so fast they were running out of prey.
All told, these undersea craft destroyed 1,042 ships, or about 50 percent of Japans entire life-sustaining merchant fleet.
Giant bomber attacks were more spectacular.
Launched from Saipan and other captured Mariana islands, they were reducing the enemys fragile cities to cinders.
The massive fire-bomb raid on Tokyo, March 910, 1945, was annihilating.
It destroyed over 250,000 buildings, gutted a quarter of the city, and killed an estimated 83,000 peoplea loss comparable to that later inflicted by atomic bombs.
General MacArthur was also on the move.
Completing the conquest of jungle-draped New Guinea, he headed northwest for the Philippines, en route to Japan, with 600 ships and 250,000 men.
In a scene well staged for the photographers, he splashed ashore at Leyte Island on October 20, 1944, with the summons, People of the Philippines, I have returned.
Rally to me.
Japans navystill menacingnow made one last-chance effort to destroy MacArthur by wiping out his transports and supply ships.
A gigantic clash at Leyte Gulf, fought on the sea and in the air, was actually three battles (October 2326, 1944).
The Americans won all of them, though the crucial engagement was almost lost when Admiral William F.
(Bull) Halsey was decoyed away by a feint.
Japan was through as a sea power: it had lost about sixty ships in the greatest naval battle of all time.
American fleets, numbering more than four thousand vessels, now commanded the western Pacific.
Several battleships, raised from the mud of Pearl Harbor, were exacting belated but sweet revenge.
Overrunning Leyte, MacArthur next landed on the main Philippine island of Luzon in January 1945.
Manila was his major objective; the ravaged city fell in March, but the Philippines were not conquered until July.
Victory was purchased only after bitter fighting against holed-in Japanese, who took a toll of over sixty thousand American casualties.
Americas steel vise was tightening mercilessly around Japan.
The tiny island of Iwo Jima, needed as a haven for damaged American bombers returning from Japan, was captured in March 1945.
This desperate twenty-five-day assault cost over four thousand American dead.
Okinawa, a well-defended Japanese island, was next on the list: it was needed for closer bases from which to blast and burn enemy cities and industries.
Fighting dragged on from April to June of 1945.
C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 Japanese soldiers, fighting with incredible courage from their caves, finally sold Okinawa for fifty thousand American casualties, while suffering far heavier losses themselves.
The American navy, which covered the invasion of Okinawa, sustained severe damage.
Japanese suicide pilots (kamikazes) in an exhibition of mass hara-kiri for their god-emperor, crashed their bomb-laden planes onto the decks of the invading fleet.
All told, the death squads sank over thirty ships and badly damaged scores more.
Strategists in Washington were meanwhile planning an all-out invasion of the main islands of Japanan invasion that presumably would cost hundreds of thousands of American (and even more Japanese) casualties.
Tokyo, recognizing imminent defeat, had secretly sent peace feelers to Moscow, which had not yet entered the Far Eastern war.
The Americans, having broken the secret Japanese radio codes, knew of these feelers.
But bomb-scorched Japan still showed no outward willingness to surrender  The Potsdam conference, held near Berlin in July 1945, sounded the death knell of the Japanese.
There President Truman, still new on his job, met in a seventeen-day parley with Joseph Stalin and the British leaders.
The conferees issued a stern ultimatum to Japan: surrender or be destroyed.
American bombers showered the dire warning on Japan in tens of thousands of leaflets, but no encouraging response was forthcoming.
America had a fantastic ace up its sleeve.
Early in 1940, after Hitlers wanton assault on Poland, Roosevelt was persuaded by American and exiled scientists, notably German-born Albert Einstein, to push ahead with preparations for unlocking the secret of an atomic bomb.
Congress, at Roosevelts blank-check request, blindly made available nearly $2 billion.
Many military minds were skeptical of this damned professors nonsense, but fears that the Germans might first acquire such an awesome weapon provided a powerful spur to action.
Ironically, Germany eventually abandoned its own atomic project as too costly.
And as it happened, the war against Germany ended before the American weapon was ready.
In a cruel twist of fate, Japan not Germany, the original targetsuffered the fate of being the first nation subjected to atomic  bombardment.
The huge atomic project was pushed feverishly forward, as American know-how and industrial power were combined with the most advanced scientific knowledge.
Much technical skill was provided by British and refugee scientists, who had fled to America to escape the torture chambers of the dictators.
Finally, in the desert near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945, the experts detonated the first awesome and devastating atomic device.
With Japan still refusing to surrender, the Potsdam threat was fulfilled.
On August 6, 1945, a lone American bomber dropped one atomic bomb on the city of Hiroshima, Japan.
In a blinding flash of death, followed by a funnel-shaped cloud, about 180,000 people were left killed, wounded, or missing.
Some 70,000 of them died instantaneously.
Sixty thousand more soon perished from burns and radiation disease.
Two days later, on August 8, Stalin entered the war against Japan, exactly on the deadline date previously agreed upon with his allies.
Soviet armies speedily overran the depleted Japanese defenses in Manchuria and Korea in a six-day victory parade that involved several thousand Russian casualties.
Stalin was evidently determined to be in on the kill, lest he lose a voice in the final division of Japans holdings.
Fanatically resisting Japanese, though facing atomization, still did not surrender.
American aviators, on August 9, dropped a second atomic bomb on the city of Nagasaki.
The explosion took a horrible toll of about eighty thousand people killed or missing.
The Japanese nation could endure no more.
On August 10, 1945, Tokyo sued for peace on one condition: that Hirohito, the bespectacled Son of Heaven, be allowed to remain on his ancestral throne as nominal emperor.
Despite their unconditional surrender policy, the Allies accepted this condition on August 14, 1945.
The Japanese, though losing face, were able to save both their exalted ruler and what was left of their native land.
The formal end came, with dramatic force, on September 2, 1945.
Official surrender ceremonies were conducted by General MacArthur on the battleship   C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 Americans at home hysterically celebrated V-J DayVictory in Japan Dayafter the most horrible war in history had ended in mushrooming atomic clouds.
World War II proved to be terribly costly.
American forces suffered some 1 million casualties, about one-third of which were deaths.
Compared with other wars, the proportion killed by wounds and disease was sharply reduced, owing in part to the use of blood plasma and miracle drugs, notably penicillin.
Yet heavy though American losses were, the Soviet allies suffered casualties many times greaterperhaps 20 million people killed.
America was fortunate in emerging with its mainland virtually unscathed.
Two Japanese submarines, using shells and bombers, had rather harmlessly attacked the California and Oregon coast, and a few balloons, incendiary and otherwise, had drifted across the Pacific.
But that was about all.
Much of the rest of the world was utterly destroyed and destitute.
America alone was untouched and healthyoiled and muscled like a prize bull, standing astride the worlds ruined landscape.
This complex conflict was the best-fought war in Americas history.
Though unprepared for it at the outset, the nation was better prepared than for the others, partly because it had begun to buckle on its armor about a year and a half before the war officially began.
It was actually fighting German submarines in the Atlantic months before the explosion in the Pacific at Pearl Harbor.
In the end the United States showed itself to be resourceful, tough, adaptableable to accommodate itself to the tactics of an enemy who was relentless and ruthless.
American military leadership proved to be of the highest order.
A new crop of war heroes emerged in brilliant generals like Eisenhower, MacArthur, and Marshall (chief of staff ) and in imaginative admirals like Nimitz and Spruance.
President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill, as kindred spirits, collaborated closely in planning strategy.
It is fun to be in the same decade with you, FDR once cabled Churchill.
Industrial leaders were no less skilled, for marvels of production were performed almost daily.
Assembly lines proved as important as battle lines, and victory went again to the side with the most smokestacks.
The enemy was almost literally smothered by bayonets, bullets, bazookas, and bombs.
Hitler and his Axis coconspirators had chosen to make war with machines, and the ingenious Yankees could ask for nothing better.
They demonstrated again, as they had in World War I, that  the American way of war was simply moremore men, more weapons, more machines, more technology, and more money than any enemy could hope to match.
From 1940 to 1945, the output of American factories was simply phenomenal.
As Winston Churchill remarked, Nothing succeeds like excess.
Hermann Goering, a Nazi leader, had sneered, The Americans cant build planesonly electric iceboxes and razor blades.
Democracy had given its answer, as the dictators, despite long preparation, were overthrown and discredited.
It is true that an unusual amount of direct control was exercised over the individual by the Washington authorities during the war emergency.
But the American people preserved their precious liberties without serious impairment.
C HAPTER 36 America in World War II, 19411945 United States declares war on Japan Germany declares war on United States Randolph plans black march on Washington Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC) established Japanese-Americans sent to internment camps  Japan conquers the Philippines Battle of the Coral Sea Battle of Midway United States invades North Africa Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) founded Allies hold Casablanca conference Allies invade Italy Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act Zoot-suit riots in Los Angeles Race riot in Detroit Japanese driven from Guadalcanal Teheran conference D-Day invasion of France Battle of Marianas Roosevelt defeats Dewey for presidency Battle of the Bulge Roosevelt dies; Truman assumes presidency Germany surrenders Battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa Potsdam conference Atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki Japan surrenders fter World War II ended in 1945, many historians were convinced that the tragedy could have been averted if only the United States had awakened earlier from its isolationist illusions.
These scholars condemned the policies and attitudes of the 1930s as a retreat from responsibility.
Much of the historical writing in the postwar period contained the strong flavor of medicine to ward off another infection by the isolationist virus.
This approach fell into disfavor during the Vietnam War in the 1960s, when many U.S.
policymakers defended their actions in Southeast Asia by making dubious comparisons to the decade before World War II.
Some scholars responded by arguing that the lessons of the 1930sespecially about the need to avoid appeasement and to take quick and decisive action against aggressorscould not properly be applied to any and all subsequent situations.
Ho Chi Minh, they pointed out, was not Hitler, and Vietnam was not Nazi Germany.
One controversial product of this line of thinking was Bruce Russetts   argued that the United States had no clearly defined national interests at stake in 1941, and that both the nation and the world might have been better off without U.S.
intervention.
This analysis paralleled revisionist commentaries written in the 1930s about U.S.
participation in World World I.  Although few scholars fully accept Russetts conclusions, more recently writing on American entry into World War II has tended to avoid finding in that episode lessons for posterity.
Attention has focused, rather, on the wisdom or folly of specific policies, such as Washingtons hard line toward Tokyo throughout 1941, when the possibility of a negotiated settlement perhaps existed.
P. W. Schroeders Other issues include Franklin Roosevelts diplomatic role.
Was the president a bold internationalist struggling heroically against an isolationist Congress and public opinion, or did he share much of the traditional isolationist credo?
Robert Dalleks encyclopedic study of Roosevelts foreign policy portrays Roosevelt as a shrewd and calculating internationalist, whereas Donald Cameron Watts  (1989) depicts him as a myopic and ill-informed leader who overestimated his own peacemaking abilities and, like most other Americans, only belatedly awakened to the menace of totalitarianism.
No decision of the war era has provoked sharper controversy than the atomic bombings of Japan in August 1945.
Lingering moral questions about the nuclear incineration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have long threatened to tarnish the crown of military victory.
America is the only nation ever to have used an atomic weapon in war, and some critics have even claimed to find elements of racism in the fact that the bombs were dropped on people of a nonwhite race.
The fact is, however, that Germany surrendered before the bombs were ready; had the war in Europe lasted just a few months longer, some German city would probably have suffered the fate of Hiroshima.
Some scholars, notably Gar Alperovitz, have  further charged that the atomic holocausts at Hiroshima and Nagasaki were not the last shots of World War II, but the first salvos in the emerging Cold War.
Alperovitz argues that the Japanese were already defeated in the summer of 1945 and were in fact attempting to arrange a  President Truman ignored those attempts and unleashed his horrible new weapons, so the argument goes, not simply to defeat Japan but to frighten the Soviets into submission to Americas will, and to keep them out of the final stages of the warand postwar reconstructionin Asia.
Could the use of the atomic bombs have been avoided?
As Martin J. Shewins studies have shown, few policymakers at the time seriously asked that question.
American leaders wanted to end the war as quickly as possible.
Intimidating the Soviets might have been a bonus to using the bomb against Japan, but influencing Soviet behavior was never the  American military strategists had always assumed the atomic bomb would be dropped as soon as it was available.
That moment came on August 6, 1945.
Yet misgivings and remorse about the atomic conclusion of World War II have plagued the American conscience ever since.
For further reading, see page A24 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  M AKING M ODERN A MERICA  1945 to the Present W orld War II broke the back of the Great Depression in the United States and also ended the centuryand-a-half-old American tradition of isolationism in foreign affairs.
Alone among the warring powers, the United States managed to emerge from the great conflict physically unscarred, economically healthy, and diplomatically strengthened.
Yet if Americans faced a world full of promise at the wars end,  it was also a world full of dangers, none more disconcerting than Soviet communism.
These two themes of promise and menace mingled uneasily throughout the nearly five decades of the Cold War era, from the end of World War II in 1945 to the collapse of the Soviet Union  in 1991.
At home unprecedented prosperity in the postwar quarter-century nourished a robust sense of national self-confidence and fed a revolution of rising expectations.
Invigorated by the prospect of endlessly spreading affluence, Americans in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s had record numbers of babies, aspired to ever-higher standards of living, generously expanded the welfare state (especially for the elderly), widened opportunities for women, welcomed immigrants, and even found the will to grapple at long last with the nations grossest legacy  of injustice, its treatment of African-Americans.
With the exception of Dwight Eisenhowers presidency in the 1950s, Americans elected liberal Democratic presidents (Harry Truman in 1948, John F. Kennedy in 1960, and Lyndon Johnson in 1964).
The Democratic party, the party of the liberal New Deal at home and of an activist foreign policy abroad, comfortably remained the nations majority party.
Americans trusted their government and had faith in the American dream that their children would lead a richer life than their parents had done.
Anything and everything seemed possible.
The rising curve  of ascending expectations, propelled by exploding economic growth, bounded upward throughout the 1950s.
It peaked in the 1960s, an exceptionally stormy decade during which faith in government, in the wisdom of American foreign policy, and in the American dream itself, began to sour.
Lyndon Johnsons Great Society reforms, billed as the completion of the unfinished work of the New Deal, foundered on the rocks of fiscal limitations and stubborn racial resentments.
Johnson, the most ambitious reformer in the White House since Franklin Roosevelt, eventually saw his presidency destroyed by the furies unleashed over the Vietnam War.
When economic growth flattened in the 1970s, the horizon of hopes for the future seemed to sink as well.
The nation entered a frustrating period of stalled expectations, increasingly rancorous racial tensions, disillusion with government, and political stalemate, although in one important arena idealism survived.
As second-wave feminism gathered steam, women burst through barriers that had long excluded them from male domains operating everywhere from the factory floor to the U.S.
Army to the Ivy League.
Not content with private victories, they also called on the government for helpto ensure women equal opportunity as workers, fair treatment as consumers, and the right to choose an abortion.
With the exceptions of Jimmy Carter in the 1970s and Bill Clinton in the 1990s, Americans after 1968 elected conservative Republicans to the White House (Richard Nixon in 1968 and 1972, Ronald Reagan in 1980 and 1984, George Bush in 1988), but continued to elect Democratic congresses.
As the twenty-first century dawned, a newly invigorated conservative Republican party was bidding to achieve long-term majority status, while the Democratic party teetered on a tightrope between its liberal policies  and the conservative demands of the day for tax cuts and welfare reform.
Abroad the fierce competition with the Soviet Union, and after 1949 with Communist China as well, colored most every aspect  of Americas foreign relations and shaped domestic life, too.
Unreasoning fear of communists at home unleashed the destructive force of McCarthyism in the 1950sa modern-day witch hunt in which careers were capsized and lives ruined by reckless accusations of communist sympathizing.
The FBI encroached on sacred American liberties in its zeal to uncover communist subversives.
The Cold War remained cold, in the sense that no shooting conflict broke out between the great power rivals.
But the United States did fight two shooting wars, in Korea in the 1950s and Vietnam in the 1960s.
Vietnam, the only foreign war in which the United States has ever been defeated, cruelly convulsed American society, ending not only Lyndon Johnsons presidency but the thirty-five year era of the Democratic partys political dominance as well.
Vietnam also touched off the most vicious inflationary cycle in American history, and embittered and disillusioned an entire generation.
Uncle Sam in the Cold War era built a fearsome arsenal of nuclear weapons, great air and missile fleets to deliver them, a two-ocean navy, and, for a time, a large army raised by conscription.
Whether the huge expenditures necessary to maintain that gigantic defense establishment stimulated or distorted the economy is a question that remains  controversial.
Either way, big reductions in defense spending after the end of the Cold War in 1989 helped reshape the American economy and its work force as the new century opened, as did burgeoning new information technologies like the personal computer and the Internet.
The Cold War Begins  19451952 W INSTON C HURCHILL , 1945 T he American people, 140 million strong, cheered their nations victories in Europe and Asia at the conclusion of World War II.
But when the shouting faded away, many Americans began to worry about their future.
Four fiery years of global war had not entirely driven from their minds the painful memories of twelve desperate years of the Great Depression.
Still more ominously, victory celebrations had barely ended before Americas crumbling relations with its wartime ally, the Soviet Union, threatened a new and even more terrible international conflict.
The decade of the 1930s had left deep scars.
Joblessness and insecurity had pushed up the suicide rate and dampened the marriage rate.
Babies went unborn as pinched budgets and sagging self-esteem wrought a sexual depression in American bedrooms.
The war had banished the blight of depression, but would the respite last?
Grim-faced observers were warning that the war had only temporarily lifted the pall of economic stagnation and that peace would bring the return of hard times.
Homeward-bound GIs, so the gloomy predictions ran, would step out of the armys chow lines and back into the breadlines of the unemployed.
The faltering economy in the initial postwar years threatened to confirm the worst predictions of the doomsayers who foresaw another Great Depression.
Real gross national product (GNP) slumped sickeningly in 1946 and 1947 from its wartime peak.
With the removal of wartime price controls, prices giddily levitated by 33 percent in 19461947.
An  epidemic of strikes swept the country.
During 1946 alone some 4.6 million laborers laid down their tools, fearful that soon they could barely afford the autos and other goods they were manufacturing.
The growing muscle of organized labor deeply annoyed many conservatives.
They had their revenge against labors New Deal gains in 1947, when a Republican-controlled Congress (the first in fourteen years) passed the Taft-Hartley Act over President Trumans vigorous veto.
Labor leaders condemned the Taft-Hartley Act as a slave-labor law.
It outlawed the closed (all-union) shop, made unions liable for damages that resulted from jurisdictional disputes among themselves, and required union leaders to take a noncommunist oath.
Taft-Hartley was only one of several obstacles that slowed the growth of organized labor in the years after World War II.
In the heady days of the New Deal, unions had spread swiftly in the industrialized Northeast, especially in huge manufacturing industries like steel and automobiles.
But labors postwar efforts to organize in the historically antiunion regions of the South and West proved frustrating.
The CIOs Operation Dixie, aimed at unionizing southern textile workers and steelworkers, failed miserably in 1948 to overcome lingering fears of racial mixing.
And workers in the rapidly growing service sector of the economymany of them middle-aged women, often working only parttime in small shops, widely separated from one anotherproved much more difficult to organize than the thousands of assembly-line workers who in the 1930s had poured into the auto and steel unions.
Union membership would peak in the 1950s and then begin a long, unremitting decline.
The Democratic administration meanwhile took some steps of its own to forestall an economic downturn.
It sold war factories and other government installations to private businesses at fire-sale prices.
It secured passage in 1946 of the Employment Act, making it government policy to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.
The act created a three-member Council of Economic Advisers to provide the president with the data and the recommendations to make that policy a reality.
Most dramatic was the passage of the Servicemens Readjustment Act of 1944better known as the GI Bill of Rights, or the GI Bill.
Enacted partly out of fear that the employment markets would never be able to absorb 15 million returning veterans at wars end, the GI Bill made generous provisions for sending the former soldiers to school.
In the postwar decade, some 8 million veterans advanced their education at Uncle Sams expense.
The majority attended technical and vocational schools, but colleges and universities were crowded to the blackboards as more than 2 million ex-GIs stormed the halls of higher learning.
The total eventually spent for education was some $14.5 billion in taxpayer dollars.
The act also enabled the Veterans Administration (VA) to guarantee about $16 billion in loans for veterans to buy homes, farms, and small businesses.
By raising educational levels and stimulating the construction industry, the GI Bill powerfully nurtured the robust and long-lived economic expansion that eventually took hold in the late 1940s and that profoundly shaped the entire history of the postwar era.
Gross national product began to climb haltingly in 1948.
Then, beginning about 1950, the American economy surged onto a dazzling plateau of sustained growth that was to last virtually uninterrupted for two decades.
Americas economic performance became the envy of the world.
National income nearly doubled in the 1950s and almost doubled again in the 1960s, shooting through the trillion-dollar mark in 1973.
Americans, some 6 percent of the worlds people, were enjoying about 40 percent of the planets wealth.
Nothing loomed larger in the history of the postWorld War II era than this fantastic eruption of affluence.
It did not enrich all Americans, and it did not touch all people evenly, but it transformed the lives of a majority of citizens and molded the agenda of politics and society for at least two generations.
Prosperity underwrote social mobility; it paved the way for the eventual success of the civil rights movement; it funded vast new welfare programs, like Medicare; and it gave Americans the confidence to exercise unprecedented international leadership in the Cold War era.
As the gusher of postwar prosperity poured forth its riches, Americans drank deeply from the gilded goblet.
Millions of depression-pinched souls sought to make up for the sufferings of the 1930s.
They determined to get theirs while the getting was good.
A people who had once considered a chicken in every pot the standard of comfort and security now hungered for two cars in every garage, swimming pools in their backyards, vacation homes, and gas-guzzling recreational vehicles.
The size of the middle class, defined as households earning between $3,000 and $10,000 a year, doubled from preGreat Depression days and included 60 percent of the American people by the mid-1950s.
By the end of that decade, the vast majority of American families owned their own car and washing machine, and nearly 90 percent owned a television seta gadget invented in the 1920s but virtually unknown until the late 1940s.
In another revolution of sweeping consequences, almost 60 percent of American families owned their own homes by 1960, compared with less than 40 percent in the 1920s.
Of all the beneficiaries of postwar prosperity, none reaped greater rewards than women.
More than ever, urban offices and shops provided a bonanza of employment for female workers.
The great majority of new jobs created in the postwar era went to women, as the service sector of the economy dramatically outgrew the old industrial and manufacturing sectors.
Women accounted for a quarter of the American work force at the end of World War II and for nearly half the labor pool five decades later.
Yet even as women continued their march into the workplace in the 1940s and 1950s, popular culture glorified the traditional feminine C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 roles of homemaker and mother.
The clash between the demands of suburban housewifery and the realities of employment eventually sparked a feminist revolt in the 1960s.
What propelled this unprecedented economic explosion?
The Second World War itself provided a powerful stimulus.
While other countries had been ravaged by years of fighting, the United States had used the war crisis to fire up its smokeless factories and rebuild its depression-plagued economy.
Invigorated by battle, America had almost effortlessly come to dominate the ruined global landscape of the postwar period.
Ominously, much of the glittering prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s rested on the underpinnings of colossal military budgets, leading some critics to speak of a permanent war economy.
The economic upturn of 1950 was fueled by massive appropriations for the Korean War, and defense spending accounted for some 10 percent of the GNP throughout the ensuing decade.
Pentagon dollars primed the pumps of high-technology industries such as aerospace, plastics, and electronicsareas in which the United States reigned supreme over all foreign competitors.
The military budget also financed much scientific research and development (R and Dhence the name of one of the most famous think tanks, the Rand Corporation).
More than ever before, unlocking the secrets of nature was the key to unleashing economic growth.
Cheap energy also fed the economic boom.
American and European companies controlled  the flow of abundant petroleum from the sandy expanses of the Middle East, and they kept prices low.
Americans doubled their consumption of inexpensive and seemingly inexhaustible oil in the  quarter-century after the war.
Anticipating a limitless future of low-cost fuels, they flung out endless ribbons of highways, installed air-conditioning in their homes, and engineered a sixfold increase  in the countrys electricity-generating capacity between 1945 and 1970.
Spidery grids of electrical cables carried the pent-up power of oil, gas, coal, and falling water to activate the tools of workers on the factory floor.
With the forces of nature increasingly harnessed in their hands, workers chalked up spectacular gains in productivitythe amount of output per hour of work.
In the two decades after the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, productivity increased at an average rate of more than 3 percent per year.
Gains in productivity were also enhanced by the rising educational level of the work force.
By 1970 nearly 90 percent of the school-age population was enrolled in educational institutionsa dramatic contrast with the opening years of the century, when only half of this age group had attended 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1985 1990 1995 1999 OUTLAYS PERCENTAGE OF FEDERAL BUDGET PERCENTAGE OF GNP 0 50 100 150 200 250 10 20 30 40 50 60 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 300 0 0 Billions of dollars Percentage Percentage  1.6 13.7 48.1 81.6 133.9 17.5 32.2 52.2 31.8 22.7 26.7 23.9 17.9 16.1 3.9 3.2 1.7 5.1 9.5 8.3 5.0 6.4 5.5 252.7 299.3 272.0 274.8 National Defense Budget, 19401999 (Sources:  relevant years.
) school.
Better educated and better equipped, American workers in 1970 could produce nearly twice as much in an hours labor as they had in 1950.
Productivity was the key to prosperity.
Rising productivity in the 1950s and 1960s virtually doubled the average Americans standard of living in the postwar quarter-century.
Also contributing to the vigor of the postwar economy were some momentous changes in the nations basic economic structure.
Conspicuous was the accelerating shift of the work force out of agriculture, which achieved productivity gains virtually unmatched by any other economic sector.
The family farm nearly became an antique artifact as consolidation produced giant agribusinesses able to employ costly machinery.
Thanks largely to mechanization and to rich new fertilizersas well as to government subsidies and price supportsone farmworker by the centurys end could produce food for over fifty people, compared with about fifteen people in the 1940s.
Farmers whose forebears had busted sod with oxen or horses now plowed their fields in air-conditioned tractor cabs, listening on their stereophonic radios to weather forecasts or the latest Chicago commodities market quotations.
Once the mighty backbone of the agricultural Republic, and still some 15 percent of the labor force at the end of World War II, farmers made up  a slim 2 percent of the American population by the 1990syet they fed much of the world.
The convulsive economic changes of the post-1945 period shook and shifted the American people, amplifying the population redistribution set in motion by World War II.
As immigrants and westward-trekking pioneers, Americans had always been a people on the move, but they were astonishingly footloose in the postwar years.
For some three decades after 1945, an average of 30 million people changed residences every year.
Families especially felt the strain, as distance divided parents from children, and brothers and sisters from one another.
One sign of this sort of stress was the phenomenal popularity of advice books on child-rearing, especially Dr.
Benjamin Spocks  instructed millions of parents during the ensuing decades in the kind of homely wisdom that was once transmitted naturally from grandparent to parent, and from parent to child.
In fluid postwar neighborhoods, friendships were also hard to sustain.
Mobility could exact a high human cost in loneliness and isolation.
Especially striking was the growth of the Sunbelta fifteen-state area stretching in a smiling crescent from Virginia through Florida and Texas to Arizona and California.
This region increased its population at a rate nearly double that of the old C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 industrial zones of the Northeast (the Frostbelt).
In the 1950s California alone accounted for onefifth of the entire nations population growth and by 1963 had outdistanced New York as the most populous statea position it still held at the start of the twenty-first century, with more than 30 million people, or one out of every eight Americans.
The South and Southwest were a new frontier for Americans after World War II.
These modern pioneers came in search of jobs, a better climate, and lower WASH.
148% ORE.
125% CALIF.
219% NEV.
1,148% IDAHO 120% MONTANA 53% WYO.
70% UTAH 224% COLO.
224% ARIZ.
584% S.D.
16% KANSAS 41% OKLA.
55% MICH.
56% N.Y.
28% N.D.
4% MINN.
65% IOWA 12% NEBR.
29% MO.
41% ARK.
40% LA.
67% TEXAS 170% N.M.
167% MISS.
31% ALA.
45% GA.
138% FLA.
477% TENN.
73% N.C.
98% S.C.
90% VA.
113% W. VA.
-10% PA.
17% OHIO 43% IND.
55% ILL.
43% WISC.
56% KY.
37% ME.
40% N.H.
132% VT.
61% MASS.
35% R.I.
32% CONN.
70% N.J.
74% DEL.
146% MD.
126% ALASKA 387% HAWAII 142% States growing faster than national rate of 85%, 19502000 States growing slower than national rate of 85%, 19502000 Population Increase, 19502000 States with figures higher than 85 percent were growing faster than the national average.
Note that much of the growth was in the Sunbelt, a loose geographical concept, as some Deep South states  had very little population growth, whereas the mountain and Pacific states were booming.
(Sources: relevant years.
) taxes.
Jobs they found in abundance, especially in  the California electronics industry, in the aerospace complexes in Florida and Texas, and in the huge military installations that powerful southern congressional representatives secured for their districts.
A Niagara of federal dollars accounted for much of the Sunbelts prosperity, though, ironically, southern and western politicians led the cry against government spending.
By the 1990s the South and West were annually receiving some $125 billion more in federal funds than the Northeast and Midwest.
A new economic war between the states seemed to be shaping up.
Northeasterners and their allies from the hard-hit heavy-industry region of the Ohio Valley (the Rustbelt) tried to rally political support with the sarcastic slogan The North shall rise again.
These dramatic shifts of population and wealth further broke the historic grip of the North on the nations political life.
Every elected occupant of the White House since 1964 has hailed from the Sunbelt, and the regions congressional representation rose as its population grew.
With their frontier ethic of unbridled individualism and their devotion to unregulated economic growth, the Sunbelters were redrawing the Republics political map.
In all regions Americas modern migrantsif they were whitefled from the cities to the burgeoning new suburbs (see Makers of America: The Suburbanites, pp.
868869).
Government policies encouraged this momentous movement.
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and Veterans Administration (VA) home-loan guarantees made it more economically attractive to own a home in the suburbs than to rent an apartment in the city.
Tax deductions for interest payments on home mortgages provided additional financial incentive.
And government-built highways that sped commuters from suburban homes to city jobs further facilitated this mass migration.
By 1960 one of every four Americans dwelt in suburbia, and the same leafy neighborhoods held more than half the nations population as the century neared its end.
The construction industry boomed in the 1950s and 1960s to satisfy this demand.
Pioneered by innovators like the Levitt brothers, whose first Levittown sprouted on New Yorks Long Island in the 1940s, builders revolutionized the techniques of home construction.
Erecting hundreds or even thousands of dwellings in a single project, specialized crews working from standardized plans laid foundations, while others raised factory-assembled framing modules, put on roofs, strung wires, installed plumbing, and finished the walls in record time and with cost-cutting efficiency.
Snooty critics wailed about the aesthetic monotony of the suburban tract developments, but eager homebuyers nevertheless moved into them by the millions.
White flight to the leafy green suburbs left  the inner citiesespecially those in the Northeast and Midwestblack, brown, and broke.
Migrating blacks from the South filled up the urban neighborhoods that were abandoned by the departing white middle class (see Makers of America: The Great African-American Migration, pp.
892893).
In effect, the incoming blacks imported the grinding poverty of the rural South into the inner cores of northern cities.
Taxpaying businesses fled with their affluent customers from downtown shops to suburban shopping malls (another postWorld War II invention).
Government policies sometimes aggravated this spreading pattern of residential segregation.
FHA administrators, citing the risk of making loans to blacks and other unharmonious racial or nationality groups, often refused them mortgages for private home purchases, thus limiting black mobility out of the inner cities and driving many minorities into public housing projects.
Even public housing programs frequently followed a so-called neighborhood composition rule, which effectively built housing for blacks in neighborhoods that were already identified as predominantly blackthus solidifying racial separation.
Of all the upheavals in postwar America, none was more dramatic than the baby boomthe huge leap in the birthrate in the decade and a half after 1945.
Confident young men and women tied the nuptial knot in record numbers at wars end, and they began immediately to fill the nations empty cradles.
They thus touched off a demographic explosion that added more than 50 million bawling babies to the nations population by the end of the 1950s.
The soaring birthrate finally crested in 1957 C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 This Ford advertisement in a popular magazine encouraged readers to buy a second car.
By the mid-1950s, once manufacturers had met the demand for cars, homes, appliances, and other consumer goods that a decade and a half of depression and world  war had pent up, they worried about how to  keep expanding their markets.
Planned obsolescencechanging design frequently enough to necessitate replacement purchasingwas one strategy.
Altering expectations about what consumers needed was another.
This advertisement suggests that the up-to-date family, living in its modern-style suburban home, had no choice but to own two cars, one for the male breadwinners business, the other for the wifes ferrying the family.
What kinds of gender role prescriptions are reinforced in this advertisement?
What assumptions has Ford made about prospective buyers of its cars?
How much can mass advertising tell us about the actual values of Americans living at a particular time?
and was followed by a deepening birth dearth.
By 1973 fertility rates had dropped below the point necessary to maintain existing population figures.
If the downward trend persisted, only further immigration would lift the U.S.
population above its 1996 level of some 264 million.
This boom-or-bust cycle of births begot a bulging wave along the American population curve.
As the oversize postwar generation grew to maturity, it was destinedlike the fabled pig passing through the pythonto strain and distort many aspects of American life.
Elementary-school enrollments, for example, swelled to nearly 34 million pupils in 1970.
Then began a steady decline, as the onwardmarching age group left in its wake closed schools and unemployed teachers.
The maturing babies of the postwar boom sent economic shock waves undulating through the decades.
As tykes and toddlers in the 1940s and 1950s, they made up a lucrative market for manufacturers of canned food and other baby products.
As teenagers in the 1960s, the same youngsters spent an estimated $20 billion a year for clothes and recorded rock musicand their sheer numbers laid the basis of the much-ballyhooed youth culture of that tumultuous decade.
In the 1970s the consumer tastes of the aging baby boomers changed again, and the most popular jeans maker began marketing pants with a fuller cut for those former kids who could no longer squeeze into their size-thirty Levis.
In the 1980s the horde of baby boomers bumped and jostled one another in the job market, struggling to get a foothold on the crowded ladder of social mobility.
In the 1990s the boom generation began to enter middle age, raising its own secondary boom of childrena faint demographic echo of the postwar population explosion.
The impact of the huge postwar generation will continue to ripple through American society well  into the twenty-first century, when its members pass eventually into retirement, placing enormous strains on the Social Security system.
Presiding over the opening of the postwar period was an accidental presidentHarry S Truman.
The moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on him, he remarked when he was called upon to shoulder the dead Roosevelts awesome burdens of leadership.
Trim and owlishly bespectacled, with his graying hair and friendly, toothy grin, Truman was called the average mans average man.
Even his heightfive feet eight incheswas average.
The first president in many years without a college education, he had farmed, served as an artillery officer in France during World War I, and failed as a haberdasher.
He then tried his hand at precinct-level  Missouri politics, through which he rose from a judgeship to the U.S.
Senate.
Though a protg of a notorious political machine in Kansas City, he had managed to keep his own hands clean.
The problems of the postwar period were staggering, and the suddenly burdened new president at first approached his tasks with humility.
But gradually he evolved from a shrinking pipsqueak into a scrappy little cuss, gaining confidence to the point C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 of cockiness.
When the Soviet foreign minister complained, I have never been talked to like that in my life, Truman shot back, Carry out your agreements and you wont get talked to like that.
Truman later boasted, I gave him the one-two, right to the jaw.
A smallish man thrust suddenly into a giant job, Truman permitted designing old associates of the Missouri gang to gather around him and, like Grant, was stubbornly loyal to them when they were caught with cream on their whiskers.
On occasion he would send critics hot-tempered and profane s.o.b.
letters.
Most troubling, in trying to demonstrate to a skeptical public his decisiveness and power of command, he was inclined to go off halfcocked or stick mulishly to a wrongheaded notion.
To err is Truman, cynics gibed.
But if he was sometimes small in the small things, he was often big in the big things.
He had down-home authenticity, few pretensions, rocksolid probity, and a lot of that old-fashioned  character trait called moxie.
Not one to dodge responsibility, he placed a sign on his White House desk that read, The buck stops here.
Among his favorite sayings was, If you cant stand the heat, get out of the kitchen.
Vast and silent, the Soviet Union continued to be the great enigma.
The conference at Teheran in 1943, where Roosevelt had first met Stalin man to man, had done something to clear the air, but much had remained unresolvedespecially questions about the postwar fates of Germany, Eastern Europe, and Asia.
A final fateful conference of the Big Three had taken place in February 1945 at Yalta.
At this former tsarist resort on the relatively warm shores of the Black Sea, Stalin, Churchill, and the fast-failing Roosevelt reached momentous agreements, after pledging their faith with vodka.
Final plans were laid for smashing the buckling German lines and shackling the beaten Axis foe.
Stalin agreed that Poland, with revised boundaries, should have a representative government based on free electionsa pledge he soon broke.
Bulgaria and Romania were likewise to have free electionsa promise also flouted.
The  Big Three further announced plans for fashioning  a new international peacekeeping organization the United Nations.
ew images evoke more vividly the prosperity of the postwar era than aerial photographs of sprawling suburbs.
Neat rows of look-alike tract houses, each with driveway and lawn and here and there a backyard swimming pool, came to symbolize the capacity of the economy to deliver the American dream to millions of families.
Suburbanization was hardly new.
Well-off city dwellers had beaten paths to leafy outlying neighborhoods since the nineteenth century.
But after 1945 the steady flow became a stampede.
The baby boom, new highways, government guarantees for mortgage lending, and favorable tax policies all made suburbia blossom.
Who were the Americans racing to the new postwar suburbs?
War veterans led the way in the late 1940s, aided by Veterans Administration mortgages that featured tiny down payments and low interest rates.
The general public soon followed.
The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) offered insured mortgages with low down payments and 2 to 3 percent interest rates on thirty-year loans.
With deals like this, it was hardly surprising that American families flocked into Levittowns, built by William and Alfred Levitt, and other similar suburban developments.
People of all kinds found their way to suburbia, heading for neighborhoods that varied from the posh to the plain.
Yet for all this diversity, the overwhelming majority of suburbanites were white and middle-class.
In 1967 sociologist Herbert Gans published  Levitt-built community outside Philadelphia.
He described suburban families in tract developments as predominantly thirdor fourth-generation Americans with some college education and at least two children.
Men tended to work in either white-collar jobs or upper-level blue-collar positions such as foremen.
Women usually worked in the home, so much so that suburbia came to symbolize the domestic confinement that feminists in the 1960s and 1970s decried in their campaign for womens rights.
The house itself became more important than ever as postwar suburbanites built their leisure lives around television, home improvement projects, and barbecues on the patio.
The center of family life shifted to the fenced-in backyard, as neighborly city habits of visiting on the front stoop, gabbing on the sidewalk, and strolling to local stores disappeared.
Institutions that had thrived as social centers in the citychurches, womens clubs, fraternal organizations, tavernshad a tougher time attracting patrons in the privatized world of postwar suburbia.
Life in the suburbs was a boon to the automobile, as parents jumped behind the wheel to shuttle children, groceries, and golf clubs to and fro.
The second car, once an unheard-of luxury, became a practical necessity for suburban families constantly on the go.
A car culture sprang up with new destinations, like drive-thru restaurants and drivein movies.
Roadside shopping centers edged out downtowns as places to shop.
Meanwhile, the new interstate highway system enabled breadwinners to live farther and farther from their jobs and still commute to work daily.
Many suburbanites continued to depend on cities for jobs, though by the 1980s the suburbs themselves became important sites of employment.
Wherever they worked, suburbanites turned their backs on the city and its problems.
They fought to maintain their communities as secluded retreats, independent municipalities with their own taxes, schools, and zoning restrictions designed to keep out public housing and the poor.
Even the naming of towns and streets reflected a pastoral ideal.
Poplar Terrace and Mountainview Drive were popular street names; East Paterson, New Jersey, was renamed Elmwood Park in 1973.
With a majority of Americans living in suburbs by the 1980s, cities lost their political clout.
Bereft of state and federal aid, cities festered with worsening social problems: poverty, drug addiction, and crime.
Middle-class African-Americans began to move to the suburbs in substantial numbers by the 1980s, but even that migration failed to alter dramatically the racial divide of metropolitan America.
Black suburbanites settled in towns like Rolling Oaks outside Miami or Brook Glen near Atlantablack middle-class towns in white-majority counties.
By the end of the twentieth century, suburbia as a whole was more racially diverse than at midcentury.
But old patterns of urban white flight and residential segregation endured.
Of all the grave decisions at Yalta, the most controversial concerned the Far East.
The atomic bomb had not yet been tested, and Washington strategists expected frightful American casualties in the projected assault on Japan.
From Roosevelts standpoint it seemed highly desirable that Stalin should enter the Asian war, pin down Japanese troops in Manchuria and Korea, and lighten American losses.
But Soviet casualties had already been enormous, and Moscow presumably needed inducements to bring it into the Far Eastern conflagration.
Horse trader Stalin was in a position at Yalta to exact a high price.
He agreed to attack Japan within three months after the collapse of Germany, and he later redeemed this pledge in full.
In return, the Soviets were promised the southern half of Sakhalin Island, lost by Russia to Japan in 1905, and Japans Kurile Islands as well.
The Soviet Union was also granted joint control over the railroads of Chinas Manchuria and special privileges in the two key seaports of that area, Dairen and Port Arthur.
These concessions evidently would give Stalin control over vital industrial centers of Americas weakening Chinese ally.
As it turned out, Moscows muscle was not necessary to knock out Japan.
Critics charged that Roosevelt had sold Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek) down the river when he conceded control of Chinas Manchuria to Stalin.
The consequent undermining of Chinese morale, so the accusation ran, contributed powerfully to Jiangs overthrow by the communists four years later.
The critics also assailed the sellout of Poland and other Eastern European countries.
Roosevelts defenders countered that Stalin, with his mighty red army, could have secured much more of China if he wished and that the Yalta conference really set limits to his ambitions.
Apologists for Roosevelt also contended that if Stalin had kept his promise to support free elections in Poland and the liberated Balkans, the sorry sequel would have been different.
Actually, Soviet troops had then occupied much of Eastern Europe, and a war to throw them out was unthinkable.
The fact is that the Big Three at Yalta were not drafting a comprehensive peace settlement; at most they were sketching general intentions and testing one anothers reactions.
Later critics who howled about broken promises overlooked that fundamental point.
In the case of Poland, Roosevelt admitted that the Yalta agreement was so elastic that the Russians can stretch it all the way from Yalta to Washington without ever technically breaking it.
More specific understandings among the wartime alliesespecially the two emerging superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Unionawaited the arrival of peace.
History provided little hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would reach cordial understandings about the shape of the postwar world.
Mutual suspicions were ancient, abundant, and abiding.
Communism and capitalism were historically hostile social philosophies.
The United States had refused officially to recognize the Bolshevik revolutionary government in Moscow until it was sixteen years old, in 1933.
Soviet skepticism toward the West was nourished by the British and American delays in opening up a second front against Germany, while the Soviet army paid a grisly price to roll the Nazi invaders back across Russia and Eastern Europe.
Britain and America had also frozen their Soviet ally out of the project to develop atomic weapons, further feeding Stalins mistrust.
The Washington government rubbed salt in Soviet wounds when it abruptly terminated vital lendlease aid to a battered USSR in 1945 and spurned Moscows plea for a $6 billion reconstruction loan while approving a similar loan of $3.75 billion to Britain in 1946.
Different visions of the postwar world also separated the two superpowers.
Stalin aimed above all to guarantee the security of the Soviet Union.
The USSR had twice in the twentieth century been stabbed in its heartland by attacks across the windswept plains of Eastern Europe.
Stalin made it clear from the outset of the war that he was determined to have friendly governments along the Soviet western border, especially in Poland.
By maintaining an extensive Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern and Central Europe, the USSR could protect itself and consolidate its revolutionary base as the worlds leading communist country.
To many Americans, that sphere of influence looked like an ill-gained empire.
Doubting that Soviet goals were purely defensive, they remembered the earlier Bolshevik call for world revolution.
Stalins emphasis on spheres also clashed with C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 Franklin Roosevelts Wilsonian dream of an open world, decolonized, demilitarized, and democratized, with a strong international organization to oversee global peace.
Even the ways in which the United States and the Soviet Union resembled each other were troublesome.
Both countries had been largely isolated from world affairs before World War IIthe United States through choice, the Soviet Union through rejection by the other powers.
Both nations also had a history of conducting a kind of missionary diplomacyof trying to export to all the world the political doctrines precipitated out of their respective revolutionary origins.
Unaccustomed to their great-power roles, unfamiliar with or even antagonistic to each other, and each believing in the universal applicability of its own particular ideology, America and the USSR suddenly found themselves staring eyeball-to-eyeball over the prostrate body of battered Europea Europe that had been the traditional center of international affairs.
In these circumstances some sort  of confrontation was virtually unavoidable.
The wartime Grand Alliance of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Britain had been a misbegotten child of necessity, kept alive only until the mutual enemy was crushed.
When the hated Hitler fell, suspicion and rivalry between communistic, despotic Russia and capitalistic, democratic America were all but inevitable.
In a fateful progression of events, marked often by misperceptions as well as by genuine conflicts of interest, the two powers provoked each other into a tense standoff known as the Cold War.
Enduring four and a half decades, the Cold War not only shaped Soviet-American relations; it overshadowed the entire postwar international order in every corner of the globe.
The Cold War also molded societies and economies and the lives of individual people all over the planet.
Despite these obstacles, the United States did manage at wars end to erect some of the structures that would support Roosevelts vision of an open world.
Meeting at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in 1944, the Western Allies established the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to encourage world trade  by regulating currency exchange rates.
They also founded the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank) to promote economic growth in war-ravaged and underdeveloped areas.
In contrast to its behavior after World War I, the United States took the lead in creating these important international bodies and supplied most of their funding.
The stubborn Soviets declined to participate.
As flags wept at half-mast, the United Nations Conference opened on schedule, April 25, 1945, despite Roosevelts dismaying death thirteen days earlier.
Unlike Woodrow Wilson, Roosevelt had displayed political tact by choosing both Republican and Democratic senators for the American delegation.
Meeting at the San Francisco War Memorial Opera House, representatives from fifty nations fashioned the United Nations charter, which strongly resembled the old League of Nations Covenant.
It featured the Security Council, dominated by the Big Five powers (the United States, Britain, the USSR, France, and China), each of whom had the right of veto, and the Assembly, which could be controlled by smaller countries.
In contrast with the chilly American reception of  the League in 1919, the Senate overwhelmingly approved the document on July 28, 1945, by a vote of 89 to 2.
The United Nations, setting up its permanent glass home in New York City, had some gratifying initial successes.
It helped preserve peace in Iran, Kashmir, and other trouble spots.
It played a large role in creating the new Jewish state of Israel.
The U.N.
Trusteeship Council guided former colonies to independence.
Through such arms as UNESCO We are here to make a choice between the quick and the dead.
That is our business.
Behind the black portent of the new atomic age lies a hope which, seized upon with faith, can work our salvation.
If we fail, then we have damned every man to be the slave of fear.
Let us not deceive ourselves; we must elect world peace or world destruction.
(United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization), FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization), and WHO (World Health Organization), the U.N.
brought benefits to peoples the world over.
Far less heartening was the failure of the United States to control the fearsome new technology of the atom.
U.S.
delegate Bernard Baruch called in 1946 for a U.N.
agency, free from the great-power veto, with worldwide authority over atomic energy, weapons, and research.
The Soviet delegate countered that the possession of nuclear weapons simply be outlawed by every nation.
Both plans quickly collapsed.
The Truman administration had no intention of giving up its bombs, and the Soviets flatly refused to give up their veto or to invite capitalist spies to inspect atomic facilities in the USSR.
A priceless opportunity to tame the nuclear monster in its infancy was lost.
The atomic clock ticked  ominously on for the next forty-five years, shadowing all relations between the Soviet Union and the United States, and casting a pall over the future of the human race.
Hitlers ruined Reich posed especially thorny problems for all the wartime Allies.
They agreed only that the cancer of Nazism had to be cut out of the German body politic, which involved punishing Nazi leaders for war crimes.
The Allies joined in trying twentytwo top culprits at Nuremberg, Germany, during 19451946.
Accusations included committing crimes against the laws of war and humanity and plotting aggressions contrary to solemn treaty pledges.
Justice, Nuremberg-style, was harsh.
Twelve of the accused Nazis swung from the gallows, and seven were sentenced to long jail terms.
Foxy Hermann Goering, whose blubbery chest had once blazed with ribbons, cheated the hangman a few hours before his scheduled execution by swallowing a hidden cyanide capsule.
The trials of several small-fry Nazis continued for years.
Legal critics  in America condemned these proceedings as judicial lynchings, because the victims were tried for offenses that had not been clear-cut crimes when the war began.
Beyond punishing the top Nazis, the Allies could agree on little about postwar Germany.
Some American Hitler-haters, noting that an industrialized Germany had been a brutal aggressor, at first wanted to dismantle German factories and reduce the country to a potato patch.
The Soviets, denied American economic assistance, were determined to rebuild their shattered land by extracting enormous reparations from the Germans.
Both these desires clashed headlong with the reality that an industrial, healthy German economy was indispensable to the recovery of Europe.
The Americans soon came to appreciate that fact.
But the Soviets, deeply fearful of another blitzkrieg, resisted all efforts to revitalize Germany.
C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 Along with Austria, Germany had been divided at wars end into four military occupation zones, each assigned to one of the Big Four powers (France, Britain, America, and the USSR).
The Western Allies refused to allow Moscow to bleed their zones of the reparations that Stalin insisted he had been promised at Yalta.
They also began to promote the idea of a reunited Germany.
The communists responded by tightening their grip on their Eastern zone.
Before long, it was apparent that Germany would remain indefinitely divided.
West Germany eventually became an independent country, wedded to the West.
East Germany, along with other Soviet-dominated Eastern European countries, such as Poland and Hungary, became nominally independent satellite states, bound to the Soviet Union.
Eastern Europe virtually disappeared from Western sight behind the iron curtain of secrecy and isolation that Stalin clanged down across Europe from the Baltic to the Adriatic.
The division of Europe would endure for more than four decades.
With Germany now split in two, there remained the problem of the rubble heap known as Berlin.
Lying deep within the Soviet zone (see the map below), this beleaguered isle in a red sea had been broken, like Germany as a whole, into sectors occupied by troops of each of the four victorious powers.
In 1948, following controversies over German currency reform and four-power control, the Soviets abruptly choked off all rail and highway access to Berlin.
They evidently reasoned that the Allies would be starved out.
Berlin became a hugely symbolic issue for both sides.
At stake was not only the fate of the city but a test of wills between Moscow and Washington.
The Americans organized a gigantic airlift in the midst of hair-trigger tension.
For nearly a year, flying some of the very aircraft that had recently dropped bombs on Berlin, American pilots ferried thousands of tons of supplies a day to the grateful Berliners, their former enemies.
Western Europeans took heart from From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the Continent.
U.S.
ZONES DENMARK Bremen Bonn Frankfurt POLAND CZECHOSLOVAKIA AUSTRIA FRANCE BELG.
LUX.
SWITZERLAND NETH.
Prewar (1937) boundary of Germany Boundary  between East and West Germany SAAR Berlin Postwar Partition of Germany Germany lost much of its territory in the  east to Poland and the Soviet Union.
The military occupation zones were the bases for the formation of two separate countries in 1949, when the British, French, and American zones became West Germany, and the Soviet zone became East Germany.
(The two Germanies were reunited in 1990.
) Berlin remained under joint four-power occupation from 1945 to 1990 and became a focus and symbol of Cold War tensions.
this vivid demonstration of Americas determination to honor its commitments in Europe.
The Soviets, their bluff dramatically called, finally lifted their blockade in May 1949.
In the same year, the governments of the two Germanies, East and West, were formally established.
The Cold War had icily  congealed.
A crafty Stalin also probed the Wests resolve at other sensitive points, including oil-rich Iran.
Seeking to secure oil concessions similar to those held by the British and Americans, Stalin in 1946 broke an agreement to remove his troops from Irans northernmost province, which the USSR had occupied, with British and American approval, during World War II.
Instead, he used the troops to aid a rebel movement.
Truman sent off a stinging protest, and the Soviet dictator backed down.
Moscows hard-line policies in Germany, Eastern Europe, and the Middle East wrought a psychological Pearl Harbor.
The eyes of Americans were jarred wide open by the Kremlins apparent unwillingness to continue the wartime partnership.
Any remaining goodwill from the period of comradeship-in-arms evaporated in a cloud of dark distrust.
Im tired of babying the Soviets, Truman remarked privately in 1946, as attitudes on both sides began to harden frostily.
Trumans piecemeal responses to various Soviet challenges took on intellectual coherence in 1947, with the formulation of the containment doctrine.
Crafted by a brilliant young diplomat and Soviet specialist, George F. Kennan, this concept held that Russia, whether tsarist or communist, was relentlessly expansionary.
But the Kremlin was also cautious, Kennan argued, and the flow of Soviet power into every nook and cranny available to it could be stemmed by firm and vigilant containment.
Truman embraced Kennans advice when he formally and publicly adopted a get-tough-withRussia policy in 1947.
His first dramatic move was triggered by word that heavily burdened Britain could no longer bear the financial and military load of defending Greece against communist pressures.
If Greece fell, Turkey would presumably collapse and the strategic eastern Mediterranean would pass into the Soviet orbit.
In a surprise appearance, the president went before Congress on March 12, 1947, and requested support for what came to be known as the Truman Doctrine.
Specifically, he asked for $400 million to bolster Greece and Turkey, which Congress quickly granted.
More generally, he declared that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressuresa sweeping and open-ended commitment of vast and worrisome proportions.
Critics then and later charged that Truman had overreacted by promising unlimited support to any tinhorn despot who C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 claimed to be resisting Communist aggression.
Critics also complained that the Truman Doctrine needlessly polarized the world into pro-Soviet and pro-American camps and unwisely construed the Soviet threat as primarily military in nature.
Apologists for Truman have explained that it was Trumans fear of a revived isolationism that led him to exaggerate the Soviet threat and to cast his message in the charged language of a holy global war against godless communisma description of the Cold  War that straightjacketed future policymakers who would seek to tone down Soviet-American competition and animosity.
A threat of a different sort loomed in Western Europeespecially France, Italy, and Germany.
These key nations were still suffering from the hunger and economic chaos spawned by war.
They were in grave danger of being taken over from the inside by Communist parties that could exploit these hardships.
President Truman responded with a bold policy.
In a commencement address at Harvard University on June 5, 1947, Secretary of State George C. Marshall invited the Europeans to get together and work out a  did so, then the United States would provide substantial financial assistance.
This forced cooperation constituted a powerful nudge on the road to  the eventual creation of the European Community (EC).
The democratic nations of Europe rose enthusiastically to the life-giving bait of the so-called Marshall Plan.
They met in Paris in July 1947 to thrash out the details.
There Marshall offered the same aid to the Soviet Union and its allies, if they would make political reforms and accept certain outside controls.
But nobody was surprised when the Soviets walked out, denouncing the Martial Plan as one more capitalist trick.
The Marshall Plan called for spending $12.5 billion over four years in sixteen cooperating countries.
Congress at first balked at this mammoth sum.
It looked even more huge when added to the nearly $2 billion the United States had already contributed to European relief through the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) and the hefty American contributions to the United Nations, IMF, and World Bank.
But a Soviet-sponsored communist coup in Czechoslovakia finally awakened the legislators to reality, and they voted the initial appropriations in April 1948.
Congress evidently concluded that if Uncle Sam did not get the Europeans back on their feet, they would never get off his back.
Trumans Marshall Plan was a spectacular success.
American dollars pumped reviving blood into the economic veins of the anemic Western European nations.
Within a few years, most of them were exceeding their prewar outputs, as an economic miracle drenched Europe in prosperity.
The Communist parties in Italy and France lost ground, and these two keystone countries were saved from the westward thrust of communism.
A resolute Truman made another fateful decision in 1948.
Access to Middle Eastern oil was crucial to the European recovery program and, increasingly, to the health of the U.S.
economy, as domestic American oil reserves dwindled.
Yet the Arab oil countries adamantly opposed the creation of the Jewish state of Israel in the British mandate territory of Palestine.
Should Israel be born, a Saudi Arabian leader warned Truman, the Arabs will lay siege to it until it dies of famine.
Defying Arab wrath as well as the objections of his own State and Defense Departments and the European Allies, all of them afraid to antagonize the oil-endowed Arabs, Truman officially recognized the state of Israel on the day of its birth, May 14, 1948.
Humanitarian sympathy for the Jewish survivors of the Holocaust ranked high among his reasons, as did his wishes to preempt Soviet influence in the Jewish state and to retain the support of American Jewish voters.
Trumans policy of strong support for Israel would vastly complicate U.S.
relations with the Arab world in the decades ahead.
C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 OTHER ASIA AND PACIFIC ALL OTHERS UNITED STATES CHINA LATIN AMERICA NEAR EAST AND AFRICA EUROPE AUSTRALIA $8 .9 Bill i on $1 .
0 B i l lio n $ 0 .
6 B il li on $3 5.
3 B illi on $ 1 .
1 B ill i o n United States Foreign Aid, Military and Economic, 19451954 Marshall Plan aid swelled the outlay for Europe.
Note the emphasis on  the developed world, with relatively little aid going to  what are now called Third  World countries.
The Cold War, the struggle to contain Soviet communism, was not war, yet it was not peace.
The standoff with the Kremlin banished the dreams of tax-fatigued Americans that tanks could be beaten into automobiles.
The Soviet menace spurred the unification of the armed services as well as the creation of a huge new national security apparatus.
Congress in 1947 passed the National Security Act, creating the Department of Defense.
The department was to be housed in the sprawling Pentagon building on the banks of the Potomac and to be headed by a new cabinet officer, the secretary of defense.
Under the secretary, but now without cabinet status, were the civilian secretaries of the navy, the army (replacing the old secretary of war), and the air force (a recognition of the rising importance of air power).
The uniformed heads of each service were brought together as the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The National Security Act also established the National Security Council (NSC) to advise the president on security matters and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to coordinate the governments  foreign fact-gathering.
The Voice of America, authorized by Congress in 1948, began beaming American radio broadcasts behind the iron curtain.
In the same year, Congress resurrected the military draft, providing for the conscription of selected young men from nineteen to twenty-five years of age.
The forbidding presence of the Selective Service System shaped millions of young peoples educational, marital, and career plans in the following quarter-century.
One shoe at a time, a war-weary America was reluctantly returning to a war footing.
The Soviet threat was also forcing the democracies of Western Europe into an unforeseen degree of unity.
In 1948 Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg signed a path-breaking treaty of defensive alliance at Brussels.
They then invited the United States to join them.
The proposal confronted the United States with a historic decision.
America had traditionally avoided entangling alliances, especially in peacetime (if the Cold War could be considered peacetime).
Yet American participation in the emerging coalition could serve many purposes: it would strengthen the policy of containing the Soviet Union; it would provide a framework for the reintegration of Germany into the European family; and it would reassure jittery Europeans that a traditionally isolationist Uncle Sam was not about to abandon them to the marauding Russian bearor to a resurgent and domineering Germany.
The Truman administration decided to join the European pact, called the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in recognition of its transatlantic character.
With white-tie pageantry, the NATO treaty was signed in Washington on April 4, 1949.
The twelve original signatories pledged to regard an attack on one as an attack on all and promised to respond with armed force if necessary.
Despite last-ditch howls from immovable isolationists, the Senate approved the treaty on July 21, 1949, by a vote of 82 to 13.
Membership was boosted to fourteen in 1952 by the inclusion of Greece and Turkey, to fifteen in 1955 by the addition of West Germany.
The NATO pact was epochal.
It marked a dramatic departure from American diplomatic convention, a gigantic boost for European unification, and a significant step in the militarization of the Cold War.
NATO became the cornerstone of all Cold War C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 American policy toward Europe.
With good reason pundits summed up NATOs threefold purpose: to keep the Russians out, the Germans down, and the Americans in.
Reconstruction in Japan was simpler than in Germany, primarily because it was largely a one-man show.
The occupying American army, under the supreme Allied commander, five-star general Douglas MacArthur, sat in the drivers seat.
In the teeth of violent protests from the Soviet officials, MacArthur went inflexibly ahead with his program for the democratization of Japan.
Following the pattern in Germany, top Japanese war criminals were tried in Tokyo from 1946 to 1948.
Eighteen of them were sentenced to prison terms, and seven were hanged.
General MacArthur, as a kind of Yankee mikado, enjoyed a stunning success.
The Japanese cooperated to an astonishing degree.
They saw that good behavior and the adoption of democracy would speed the end of the occupationas it did.
A MacArthur-dictated constitution was adopted in 1946.
It renounced militarism and introduced Western-style democratic governmentpaving the way for a phenomenal economic recovery that within a few decades made Japan one of the worlds mightiest industrial powers.
If Japan was a success story for American  policymakers, the opposite was true in China, where a bitter civil war had raged for years between  Nationalists and communists.
Washington had halfheartedly supported the Nationalist government of Generalissimo Jiang Jieshi in his struggle with the communists under Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung).
But ineptitude and corruption within the generalissimos regime gradually began to corrode the confidence of his people.
Communist armies swept south overwhelmingly, and late in 1949 Jiang was forced to flee with the remnants of his once-powerful force to the last-hope island of Formosa (Taiwan).
The collapse of Nationalist China was a depressing defeat for America and its allies in the Cold Warthe worst to date.
At one fell swoop, nearly one-fourth of the worlds populationsome 500 million peoplewas swept into the communist camp.
The so-called fall of China became a bitterly partisan issue in the United States.
The Republicans, seeking goats who had lost China, assailed President Truman and his bristly mustached, British-appearing secretary of state, Dean Acheson.
They insisted that Democratic agencies, wormy with communists, had deliberately withheld aid from Jiang Jieshi so that he would fall.
Democrats heatedly replied that when a regime has forfeited the support of its people, no amount of outside help will save it.
Truman, the argument ran, did not lose China, because he never had China to lose.
Jiang himself had never controlled all of China.
More bad news came in September 1949 when President Truman shocked the nation by announcing that the Soviets had exploded an atomic bomb approximately three years earlier than many experts had thought possible.
American strategists since 1945 had counted on keeping the Soviets in line by threats of a one-sided aerial attack with nuclear weapons.
But atomic bombing was now a game that two could play.
To outpace the Soviets in nuclear weaponry, Truman ordered the development of the H-bomb (hydrogen bomb)a city-smashing device many times more deadly than the atomic bomb.
The United States exploded its first hydrogen device on a South Pacific atoll in 1952, despite warnings from some scientists that the H-bomb was so powerful that it becomes a weapon which in practical effect is almost one of genocide.
Famed physicist Albert Einstein, whose theories had helped give birth to the atomic age, declared that annihilation of any life on earth has been brought within the range of technical possibilities.
Not to be outdone, the Soviets exploded their first H-bomb in 1953, and the nuclear arms race entered a perilously competitive cycle.
Nuclear superiority became a dangerous and delusive dream, as each side tried to outdo the other in the scramble to build more destructive weapons.
If the Cold War should ever blaze into  a hot war, there might be no world left for the  communists to communize or the democracies to democratizea chilling thought that constrained both camps.
Peace through mutual terror brought a shaky stability to the superpower standoff.
One of the most active Cold War fronts was at home, where a new antired chase was in full cry.
Many nervous citizens feared that communist spies, paid with Moscow gold, were undermining the government and treacherously misdirecting foreign policy.
In 1947 Truman launched a massive loyalty program.
The attorney general drew up a list of ninety supposedly disloyal organizations, none of which was given the opportunity to prove its innocence.
The Loyalty Review Board investigated more than  3 million federal employees, some 3,000 of whom either resigned or were dismissed, none under formal indictment.
Individual states likewise became intensely security-conscious.
Loyalty oaths in increasing numbers were demanded of employees, especially teachers.
The gnawing question for many earnest Americans was, Could the nation continue to enjoy traditional freedomsespecially freedom of speech, freedom of thought, and the right of political dissentin a Cold War climate?
In 1949 eleven communists were brought before a New York jury for violating the Smith Act of 1940, the first peacetime antisedition law since 1798.
Convicted of advocating the overthrow of  the American government by force, the defendants were sent to prison.
The Supreme Court upheld their convictions in  The House of Representatives in 1938 had established the Committee on Un-American Activities (popularly known as HUAC) to investigate The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States.
Nothing that this country did or could have done within the reasonable limits of its capabilities could have changed that result; nothing that was left undone by this country has contributed to it.
It was the product of internal Chinese forces, forces which this country tried to influence but could not.
subversion.
In 1948 committee member Richard M. Nixon, an ambitious red-catcher, led the chase after Alger Hiss, a prominent exNew Dealer and a distinguished member of the eastern establishment.
Accused of being a communist agent in the 1930s, Hiss demanded the right to defend himself.
He dramatically met his chief accuser before the Un-American Activities Committee in August 1948.
Hiss denied everything but was caught in embarrassing falsehoods, convicted of perjury in 1950, and sentenced to five years in prison.
Was America really riddled with Soviet spies?
It now seems unlikely.
But for many ordinary Americans, the hunt for communists was not just about fending off the military threat of the Soviet Union.
Unsettling dangers lurked closer to home.
While men like Nixon and Senator Joseph McCarthy led the search for communists in Washington, conservative politicians at the state and local levels discovered that all manner of real or perceived social changesincluding declining religious sentiment, increased sexual freedom, and agitation for civil rightscould be tarred with a red brush.
Anticommunist crusaders ransacked school libraries for subversive textbooks and drove debtors, drinkers, and homosexuals, all alleged to be security risks, from their jobs.
Some Americans, including President Truman, realized that the red hunt was turning into a witch hunt.
In 1950 Truman vetoed the McCarran Internal Security Bill, which among other provisions authorized the president to arrest and detain suspicious people during an internal security emergency.
Critics protested that the bill smacked of policestate, concentration-camp tactics.
But the congressional guardians of the Republics liberties enacted the bill over Trumans veto.
The stunning success of the Soviet scientists in developing an atomic bomb was attributed by many to the cleverness of communist spies in stealing American secrets.
Notorious among those who had allegedly leaked atomic data to Moscow were two American citizens, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
They were convicted in 1951 of espionage and, after prolonged appeals, went to the electric chair in 1953 the only people in American history ever executed in peacetime for espionage.
Their sensational trial and electrocution, combined with sympathy for their two orphaned children, began to sour some sober citizens on the excesses of the red-hunters.
C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 Attacking high prices and High-Tax Harry Truman, the Republicans had won control of Congress in the congressional elections of 1946.
Their prospects had seldom looked rosier as they gathered in Philadelphia to choose their 1948 presidential candidate.
They noisily renominated warmed-over New York governor Thomas E. Dewey, still as debonair as if he had stepped out of a bandbox.
Also gathering in Philadelphia, Democratic politicos looked without enthusiasm on their handme-down president and sang, Im Just Mild About Harry.
But their dump Truman movement collapsed when war hero Dwight D. Eisenhower refused to be drafted.
The peppery president, unwanted but undaunted, was then chosen in the face of vehement opposition by southern delegates.
They were alienated by his strong stand in favor of civil rights for blacks, who now mustered many votes in the big-city ghettos of the North.
Trumans nomination split the party wide open.
Embittered southern Democrats from thirteen states, like their fire-eating forebears of 1860, next met in their own convention, in Birmingham, Alabama, with Confederate flags brashly in evidence.
Amid scenes of heated defiance, these Dixiecrats nominated Governor J. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina on a States Rights party ticket.
To add to the confusion within Democratic ranks, former vice president Henry A. Wallace threw his hat into the ring.
Having parted company with the administration over its get-tough-with-Russia policy, he was nominated at Philadelphia by the new Progressive partya bizarre collection of disgruntled former New Dealers, starry-eyed pacifists, well-meaning liberals, and communist-fronters.
Wallace, a vigorous if misguided liberal, assailed Uncle Sams dollar imperialism from the stump.
This so-called Pied Piper of the Politburo took an apparently pro-Soviet line that earned him drenchings with rotten eggs in hostile cities.
But to many Americans, Wallace raised the only hopeful voice in the deepening gloom of the Cold War.
With the Democrats ruptured three ways and the Republican congressional victory of 1946 just past, Deweys victory seemed assured.
Succumbing to overconfidence engendered by his massive lead in public-opinion polls, the cold, smug Dewey confined himself to dispensing soothing-syrup trivialities like Our future lies before us.
The laws of nature, some seem to think, are ours exclusively.
Having created an air of suspicion and distrust, there will be persons among us who think our nations can know nothing except what is learned by espionage.
So, when other countries make atom bombs, these persons will cry treason at our scientists, for they will find it inconceivable that another country could make a bomb in any other way.
The seemingly doomed Truman, with little money and few active supporters, had to rely on his gut-fighter instincts and folksy personality.
Traveling the country by train to deliver some three hundred give em hell speeches, he lashed out at the Taft-Hartley slave labor law and the do-nothing Republican Congress, while whipping up support for his program of civil rights, improved labor benefits, and health insurance.
Pour it on em, Harry!
cried increasingly large and enthusiastic crowds, as the pugnacious president rained a barrage of verbal uppercuts on his opponent.
On election night the  early edition with the headline DEWEY DEFEATS TRUMAN.
But in the morning, it turned out that President Dewey had embarrassingly snatched defeat from the jaws of victory.
Truman had swept to a stunning triumph, to the complete bewilderment of politicians, pollsters, prophets, and pundits.
Even though Thurmond took away 39 electoral votes in the South, Truman won 303 electoral votes, primarily from the South, Midwest, and West.
Deweys 189 electoral votes came principally from the East.
The popular vote was 24,179,345 for Truman, 21,991,291 for Dewey, 1,176,125 for Thurmond, and 1,157,326 for Wallace.
To make the victory sweeter, the Democrats regained control of Congress as well.
Trumans victory rested on farmers, workers, and blacks, all of whom were Republican-wary.
Republican overconfidence and Trumans lone-wolf, neversay-die campaign also won him the support of many Americans who admired his guts.
No one wanted him, someone remarked, except the people.
Dewey, in contrast, struck many voters as arrogant, evasive, and wooden.
When Dewey took the platform to give a speech, said one commentator, he comes out like a man who has been mounted on casters and given a tremendous shove from behind.
Smiling and self-assured, Truman sounded a clarion note in the fourth point of his inaugural C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 Communism is based on the belief that man is so weak and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself, and therefore requires the rule of strong masters.
Democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity, as well as the inalienable right, to govern himself with reason and justice.
address, when he called for a bold new program (Point Four).
The plan was to lend U.S.
money and technical aid to underdeveloped lands to help them help themselves.
Truman wanted to spend millions to keep underprivileged peoples from becoming communists rather than spend billions to shoot them after they had become communists.
This farseeing program was officially launched in 1950, and it brought badly needed assistance to impoverished countries, notably in Latin America, Africa, the Near East, and the Far East.
At home Truman outlined a sweeping Fair Deal program in his 1949 message to Congress.
It called for improved housing, full employment, a higher minimum wage, better farm price supports, new TVAs, and an extension of Social Security.
But most of the Fair Deal fell victim to congressional opposition from Republicans and southern Democrats.
The only major successes came in raising the minimum wage, providing for public housing in the Housing Act of 1949, and extending old-age insurance to many more beneficiaries in the Social Security Act of 1950.
Korea, the Land of the Morning Calm, heralded a new and more disturbing phase of the Cold Wara shooting phasein June 1950.
When Japan collapsed in 1945, Soviet troops had accepted the Japanese surrender north of the thirty-eighth parallel on the Korean peninsula, and American troops had done likewise south of that line.
Both superpowers professed to want the reunification of Korea, but, as in Germany, each helped to set up rival regimes above and below the parallel.
By 1949, when the Soviets and Americans had both withdrawn their forces, the entire peninsula was a bristling armed camp, with two hostile regimes eyeing each other suspiciously.
Secretary of State Acheson seemed to wash his hands of the dispute early in 1950, when he declared in a memorable speech that Korea was outside the essential United States defense perimeter in the Pacific.
The explosion came on June 25, 1950.
Spearheaded by Soviet-made tanks, North Korean army columns rumbled across the thirty-eighth parallel.
Caught flat-footed, the South Korean forces were shoved back southward to a dangerously tiny defensive area around Pusan, their weary backs to the sea.
President Truman sprang quickly into the breach.
The invasion seemed to provide devastating proof of a fundamental premise in the containment doctrine that shaped Washingtons foreign policy: that even a slight relaxation of Americas guard was an invitation to communist aggression somewhere.
The Korean invasion also provided the occasion for a vast expansion of the American military.
Trumans National Security Council had recommended in a famous document of 1950 (known as National Security Council Memorandum Number 68, or NSC-68) that the United States should quadruple its defense spending.
Buried at the time because it was considered politically impossible to implement, NSC-68 was resurrected by the Korean crisis.
Korea saved us, Secretary of State Acheson later commented.
Truman now ordered a massive military buildup, well beyond what was necessary for the immediate purposes of the Korean War.
Soon the United States had 3.5 million men under arms and was spending $50 billion per year on the defense budgetsome 13 percent of the GNP.
NSC-68 was a key document of the Cold War period, not only because it marked a major step in the militarization of American foreign policy, but also because it vividly reflected the sense of almost limitless possibility that pervaded postwar American society.
NSC-68 rested on the assumption that the enormous American economy could bear without strain the huge costs of a gigantic rearmament program.
Said one NSC-68 planner, There was practically nothing the country could not do if it wanted to do it.
Truman took full advantage of a temporary Soviet absence from the United Nations Security Council on June 25, 1950, to obtain a unanimous New York Daily News  The New Deal is kaput like the Thirty Years War or the Black Plague or other disasters.
[Its demise] is like coming out of the darkness into sunlight.
Like feeling clean again after a long time in the muck.
condemnation of North Korea as an aggressor.
(Why the Soviets were absent remains controversial.
Scholars once believed that the Soviets were just as surprised as the Americans by the attack.
It now appears that Stalin had given his reluctant approval to North Koreas strike plan but believed that the fighting would be brief and that the United States would take little interest in it.
) The Council also called upon all U.N.
members, including the United States, to render every assistance to restore peace.
Two days later, without consulting Congress, Truman ordered American air and naval units to support South Korea.
Before the week was out, he also ordered General Douglas MacArthurs Japan-based occupation troops into action alongside the beleaguered South Koreans.
Officially, the United States was simply participating in a United Nations police action.
But in fact, the United States made up the overwhelming bulk  of the U.N.
contingents, and General MacArthur, appointed U.N.
commander of the entire operation, took his orders from Washington, not from the Security Council.
Rather than fight his way out of the southern Pusan perimeter, MacArthur launched a daring amphibious landing behind the enemys lines at Inchon.
This bold gamble on September 15, 1950, succeeded brilliantly; within two weeks the North Koreans had scrambled back behind the sanctuary of the thirty-eighth parallel.
Trumans avowed intention was to restore South Korea to its former borders, but the pursuing South Koreans had already crossed the thirty-eighth parallel, and there seemed little point in permitting the North Koreans to regroup and come again.
The U.N.
Assembly tacitly authorized a crossing by MacArthur, whom President Truman ordered northward, provided that there was no intervention in force by the Chinese or Soviets.
The Americans thus raised the stakes in Korea, and in so doing they quickened the fears of another potential player in this dangerous game.
The Chinese communists had publicly warned that they would not sit idly by and watch hostile troops approach the strategic Yalu River boundary between Korea and China.
But MacArthur pooh-poohed all predictions of an effective intervention by the Chinese and reportedly boasted that he would have the boys home by Christmas.
MacArthur erred badly.
In November 1950 hordes of Chinese volunteers fell upon his rashly overextended lines and hurled the U.N.
forces reeling back down the peninsula.
The fighting now sank into a frostbitten stalemate on the icy terrain near the thirty-eighth parallel.
An imperious MacArthur, humiliated by this rout, pressed for drastic retaliation.
He favored a blockade of the Chinese coast and bombardment of C HAPTER 37 The Cold War Begins, 19451952 June 25, 1950 Sept.
14, 1950 Nov.
25, 1950 July 27, 1953 NORTH KOREA MANCHURIA (China) USSR SOUTH KOREA SOUTH KOREA Seoul Pusan Pusan Pusan Pusan 38  MacArthur attack Armistice line Chinese counter-attack SOUTH KOREA Seoul 38  NORTH KOREA Seoul Seoul NORTH KOREA 38  38  38  38  38  38  North Korean attack North Korean attack SOUTH KOREA NORTH KOREA MANCHURIA (China) USSR MANCHURIA (China) USSR MANCHURIA (China) USSR The Shifting Front in Korea Chinese bases in Manchuria.
But Washington policymakers, with anxious eyes on Moscow, refused to enlarge the already costly conflict.
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff declared that a wider clash in Asia would be the wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy.
Europe, not Asia, was the administrations first concern; and the USSR, not China, loomed as the more sinister foe.
Two-fisted General MacArthur felt that he was being asked to fight with one hand tied behind his back.
He sneered at the concept of a limited war and insisted that there is no substitute for victory.
When the general began to take issue publicly with presidential policies, Truman had no choice but to remove the insubordinate MacArthur from command (April 11, 1951).
MacArthur, a legend in his own mind, returned to an uproarious welcome, whereas Truman was condemned as a pig, an imbecile, a Judas, and an appeaser of Communist Russia and Communist China.
In July 1951 truce discussions began in a rude field tent near the firing line but were almost immediately snagged on the issue of prisoner exchange.
Talks dragged on unproductively for nearly two years while men continued to die.
Servicemens Readjustment Act (GI Bill) Bretton Woods economic conference Spock publishes  Yalta conference United States ends lend-lease to the USSR United Nations established Nuremberg war crimes trials in Germany Employment Act creates Council of  Economic Advisers Iran crisis Tokyo war crimes trials Truman Doctrine Marshall Plan Taft-Hartley Act National Security Act creates Department of Defense, National Security Council (NSC), and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) United States officially recognizes Israel Voice of America begins radio broadcasts behind iron curtain Hiss case begins Truman defeats Dewey for presidency Berlin crisis NATO established Communists defeat Nationalists in China American economy begins postwar growth McCarthy red hunt begins McCarran Internal Security Bill passed by Congress over Trumans veto Korean War Truman fires MacArthur Rosenbergs convicted of treason United States explodes first hydrogen bomb Postwar peak of U.S.
birthrate U.S.
birthrate falls below replacement level hose fault was the Cold War?
(And, for that matter, who should get credit for ending it?
) For two decades after World War II, American historians generally agreed that the aggressive Soviets were solely responsible.
This orthodox or official appraisal squared with the traditional view of the United States as a virtuous, innocent land with an idealistic foreign policy.
This point of view also justified Americas Cold War containment policy, which cast the Soviet Union as the aggressor that must be confined by an ever-vigilant United States.
America supposedly had only defensive intentions, with no expansionary ambitions of its own.
In the 1960s a vigorous revisionist interpretation flowered, powerfully influenced by disillusion over U.S.
involvement in Vietnam.
The revisionists stood the orthodox view on its head.
The Soviets, they argued, had only defensive intentions at the end of World War II; it was the Americans who had behaved provocatively by brandishing their new atomic weaponry.
Some of these critics pointed an accusing finger at President Truman, alleging that he abandoned Roosevelts conciliatory approach  to the Soviets and adopted a bullying attitude, emboldened by the American atomic monopoly.
More radical revisionists like Gabriel and Joyce Kolko even claimed to have found the roots of Trumans alleged belligerence in long-standing American policies of economic imperialismpolicies that eventually resulted in the tragedy of Vietnam (see pp.
935938).
In this view the Vietnam War followed logically from Americas insatiable need for overseas markets and raw materials.
Vietnam itself may have been economically unimportant, but, so the argument ran, a communist Vietnam represented an intolerable challenge to American hegemony.
Ironically, revisionists thus endorsed the so-called domino theory, which official apologists often cited in defense of Americas Vietnam policy.
According to the domino theory, if the United States declined to fight in Vietnam, other countries would lose their faith in Americas will (or their fear of American power) and would tumble one after the other like dominoes into the Soviet camp.
Revisionists stressed what they saw as the  behind the domino theory: losing in Vietnam, they claimed, would unravel the American economy.
In the 1970s a postrevisionist interpretation emerged that is widely agreed upon today.
Historians such as John Lewis Gaddis and Melvyn Leffler poohpooh the economic determinism of the revisionists, while frankly acknowledging that the United States did have vital security interests at stake in the postWorld War II era.
The postrevisionists analyze the ways in which inherited ideas (like isolationism) and the contentious nature of postwar domestic politics, as well as miscalculations by American leaders, led a nation in search of security into seeking not simply a sufficiency but a preponderance of power.
The American   scholars suggest, exacerbated U.S.-Soviet relations and precipitated the four-decade-long nuclear arms race that formed the centerpiece of the Cold War.
In the case of Vietnam, the postrevisionist historians focus not on economic necessity, but on a failure of political intelligence, induced by the stressful conditions of the Cold War, that made the dubious domino theory seem plausible.
Misunderstanding Vietnamese intentions, exaggerating Soviet ambitions, and fearing to appear soft on communism in the eyes of their domestic political rivals, American leaders plunged into Vietnam, sadly misguided by their own Cold War obsessions.
Most postrevisionists, however, still lay the lions share of the blame for the Cold War on the Soviet Union.
By the same token, they credit the Soviets with ending the Cold Wara view hotly disputed by Ronald Reagans champions, who claim that it was his anti-Soviet policies in the 1980s that brought the Russians to their knees (see pp.
984985).
The great unknown, of course, is the precise nature of Soviet thinking in the Cold War years.
Were Soviet aims predominantly defensive, or did the Kremlin incessantly plot world conquest?
Was there an opportunity for reconciliation with the West following Stalins death in 1953?
Should Mikhail Gorbachev or Ronald Reagan be remembered as the leader who ended the Cold War?
With the opening of Soviet archives, scholars are eagerly pursuing answers to such questions.
For further reading, see page A25 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Eisenhower Era  19521960 D WIGHT D. E ISENHOWER , A PRIL 16, 1953 I n President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the man and the hour met.
Americans yearned for a period of calm in which they could pursue without distraction their new visions of consumerist affluence.
The nation sorely needed a respite from twenty years of depression and war.
Yet the American people unexpectedly found themselves in the early 1950s  dug into the frontlines of the Cold War abroad and dangerously divided at home over the explosive issues of communist subversion and civil rights.
They longed for reassuring leadership.
Ike seemed ready both to reassure and to lead.
Democratic prospects in the presidential election of 1952 were blighted by the military deadlock in Korea, Trumans clash with MacArthur, war-bred inflation, and whiffs of scandal from the White House.
Dispirited Democrats, convening in Chicago, nominated a reluctant Adlai E. Stevenson, the witty, eloquent, and idealistic governor of Illinois.
Republicans enthusiastically chose General Dwight D. Eisenhower on the first ballot.
As a concession to the hard-line anticommunist wing of the party, the convention selected as Ikes running mate California senator Richard M. Nixon, who had distinguished himself as a relentless red-hunter.
Eisenhower was already the most popular American of his time, as I Like Ike buttons everywhere testified.
His ruddy face, captivating grin, and glowing personality made him a perfect candidate in the dawning new age of television politics.
He had an authentic heros credentials as wartime supreme commander of the Allied forces in Europe, army chief of staff after the war, and the first supreme commander of NATO from 1950 to 1952.
He had also been civilianized by a brief term as president of Columbia University from 1948 to 1950.
Striking a grandfatherly, nonpartisan pose, Eisenhower left the rough campaigning to Nixon, who relished pulling no punches.
The vicepresidential candidate lambasted his opponents with charges that they had cultivated corruption, caved in on Korea, and coddled communists.
He particularly blasted the intellectual (egghead) Stevenson as Adlai the appeaser, with a Ph.D.
from [Secretary of State] Dean Achesons College of Cowardly Communist Containment.
Nixon himself faltered when reports surfaced of a secretly financed slush fund he had tapped while holding a seat in the Senate.
Prodded by Republican party officials, Eisenhower seriously considered dropping him from the ticket, but a scared Nixon went on national television with a theatrical appeal filled with self-pity, during which he referred to the family cocker spaniel, Checkers.
This heart-tugging Checkers speech saved him his place on the ticket.
The maudlin Checkers speech also demonstrated the awesome political potentialities of televisionforeshadowed by FDRs mastery of the radio.
Nixon had defied Republican party bosses and bent Eisenhower himself to his will by appealing directly to the American people in their living rooms.
His performance illustrated the disturbing power of the new, vivid medium, which communicated with far more immediacy and effect than its electronic cousin, the radio, ever could.
Even Eisenhower reluctantly embraced the  new technology of the black-and-white television screen.
He allowed himself to be filmed in a New York TV studio giving extremely brief answers to  a nonexistent audience, whose questions were taped later, then carefully spliced with Eisenhowers statements to give the illusion of a live discussion.
To think that an old soldier should come to this, Ike grumbled.
These so-called spots foreshadowed the future of political advertising.
They amounted, as one critic observed, to selling the President like toothpaste.
Devoid of substance, they vastly oversimplified complicated economic and social issues.
What about the high cost of living?
one spot asked.
My wife Mamie worries about the same thing, Ike answered.
I tell her its my job to change that on November fourth.
In future years television made possible a kind of plebiscitarian politics, through which lone-wolf politicians could go straight to the voters without the mediating influence of parties or other institutions.
The new medium thus stood revealed as a threat to the historic role of political parties, which traditionally had chosen candidates through complex internal bargaining and had educated and mobilized the electorate.
And given televisions origins in entertainment and advertising, political messages would be increasingly tuned to the standards of show business and commercialism.
Gradually, as television spread to virtually every household in the land, those standards would rule politics with iron sway as ten-second television sound bites became the most common form of political communication.
The outcome of the presidential election of 1952 was never really in doubt.
Given an extra prod by Eisenhowers last-minute pledge to go personally to Korea to end the war, the voters overwhelmingly declared for Ike.
He garnered 33,936,234 votes to Stevensons 27,314,992.
He cracked the solid South wide open, ringing up 442 electoral votes to 89 for his opponent.
Ike not only ran far ahead of his ticket but managed to pull enough Republicans into office on his military coattails to ensure GOP control of the new Congress by a paper-thin margin.
C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 True to his campaign pledge, president-elect Eisenhower undertook a flying three-day visit to Korea in December 1952.
But even a glamorous Ike could not immediately budge the peace negotiations off dead center.
Seven long months later, after Eisenhower had threatened to use atomic weapons, an armistice was finally signed but was repeatedly violated in succeeding decades.
The brutal and futile fighting had lasted three years.
About fifty-four thousand Americans lay dead, joined by perhaps more than a million Chinese, North Koreans, and South Koreans.
Tens of billions of American dollars had been poured down the Asian sinkhole.
Yet this terrible toll in blood and treasure bought only a return to the conditions of 1950: Korea remained divided at the thirty-eighth parallel.
Americans took what little comfort they could from the fact that communism had been contained and that the bloodletting had been limited to something less than full-scale global war.
The shooting had ended, but the Cold War still remained frigidly frozen.
As a military commander, Eisenhower had cultivated a leadership style that self-consciously projected an image of sincerity, fairness, and optimism.
He had been widely perceived during the war as an unmilitary general, and in the White House he similarly struck the pose of an unpolitical president, serenely above the petty partisan fray.
He also shrewdly knew that his greatest asset was his enjoyment of the affection and respect of our citizenry, as he confided to his diary in 1949.
Ike thus seemed ideally suited to soothe the  anxieties of troubled Americans, much as a distinguished and well-loved grandfather brings stability to his family.
He played this role well as he presided over a decade of shaky peace and shining prosperity.
Yet WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
32 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
4 S.D.
4 KANSAS 8 OKLA.
8 MICH.
20 N.Y.
45 N.D.
4 MINN.
11 IOWA 10 NEBR.
6 MO.
13 ARK.
8 LA.
10 TEXAS 24 N.M.
4 MISS.
8 ALA.
11 GA.
12 FLA.
10 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 PA.
32 OHIO 25 IND.
13 ILL.
27 WISC.
12 KY.
10 ME.
5 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
16 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
16 DEL.
3 MD.
9 EisenhowerRepublican StevensonDemocratic Presidential Election of 1952 (with electoral vote by state) A Democrat quipped that if the voters liked the Republicans the way they liked Ike, the two-party system would be in bad shape.
Fortunately for Democrats, Eisenhower scored a personal, not a party, victory.
Republicans won minuscule majorities in Congress, majorities that disappeared in the congressional elections two years later.
critics charged that he unwisely hoarded the asset of his immense popularity, rather than spend it for a good cause (especially civil rights), and that he cared more for social harmony than for social justice.
One of the first problems Eisenhower faced was the swelling popularity and swaggering power of anticommunist crusader Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.
Elected to the Senate on the basis of a trumped-up war-hero record, Tailgunner Joe was just an obscure junior senator from Wisconsin until he crashed into the limelight with the spectacular charge that scores of known communists worked in the State Department.
In a February 1950 speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, McCarthy accused Secretary of State Dean Acheson of knowingly employing 205 Communist party members.
Pressed to reveal the names, McCarthy later conceded that there were only 57 genuine communists and in the end failed to root out even one.
But the speech won him national visibility, and McCarthys Republican colleagues realized the usefulness of this kind of attack on the Democratic administration.
The supposedly fair-minded Senator Robert Taft urged McCarthy, If one case doesnt work, try another.
Ohios Senator John Bricker reportedly said, Joe, youre a dirty s.o.b., but there are times when youve got to have an s.o.b.
around, and this is one of them.
McCarthys rhetoric grew bolder and his accusations spread more wildly after the Republican victory in 1952.
McCarthy saw the red hand of Moscow everywhere.
The Democrats, he charged, bent to whispered pleas from the lips of traitors.
Incredibly, he even denounced General George Marshall, former army chief of staff and exsecretary of state, as part of a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man.
McCarthy flourished in the seething Cold War atmosphere of suspicion and fear.
He was neither the first nor the most effective red-hunter, but he was surely the most ruthless, and he did the most damage to American traditions of fair play and free speech.
The careers of countless officials, writers, and actors were ruined after Low-Blow Joe had named them, often unfairly, as communists or communist sympathizers.
Politicians trembled in the face of such onslaughts, especially when opinion polls showed that a majority of the American people approved of McCarthys crusade.
His intervention in certain key senatorial elections brought resounding defeat for his enemies.
Eisenhower privately loathed McCarthy but publicly tried to stay out of his way, saying, I will not get in the gutter with that guy.
Trying to appease the brash demagogue from Wisconsin, Eisenhower allowed him, in effect, to control personnel policy at the State Department.
One baleful result was severe damage to the morale and effectiveness of the professional foreign service.
In  particular, McCarthyite purges deprived the government of a number of Asian specialists who might have counseled a wiser course in Vietnam in the fateful decade that followed.
McCarthy finally bent the bow too far when he attacked the U.S.
Army.
The embattled military men fought back in thirty-five days of televised hearings in the spring of 1954.
The political power of the new broadcast medium was again demonstrated as up to 20 million Americans at a time watched in fascination while a boorish, surly McCarthy publicly cut C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 his own throat by parading his essential meanness and irresponsibility.
A few months later, the Senate formally condemned him for conduct unbecoming a member.
Three years later, unwept and unsung, McCarthy died of chronic alcoholism.
But McCarthyism has passed into the English language as a label for the dangerous forces of unfairness and fear that a democratic society can unleash only at its peril.
America counted some 15 million black citizens in 1950, two-thirds of whom still made their homes in the South.
There they lived bound by the iron folkways of a segregated society.
A rigid set of antiquated rules known as Jim Crow laws governed all aspects of their existence, from the schoolroom to the restroom.
Every day of their lives, southern blacks dealt with a bizarre array of separate social arrangements that kept them insulated from whites, economically inferior, and politically powerless.
Later generations, black and white alike, would wonder at how their ancestors could have daily made their way through this anthropological museum of cruel and stifling customs.
Blacks everywhere in the South, for example, not only attended segregated schools but were compelled to use separate public toilets, drinking fountains, restaurants, and waiting rooms.
Trains and buses had whites only and colored only seating.
Because Alabama hotels were prohibited from serving blacks, the honeymooning Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr., and his wife, Coretta, spent their wedding night in 1953 in a blacks-only funeral parlor.
Only about 20 percent of eligible southern blacks were registered to vote, and fewer than 5 percent were registered in some Deep South states like Mississippi and Alabama.
As late as 1960, white southern sensibilities about segregation were so tender that television networks blotted out black speakers at the national political conventions for fear of offending southern stations.
Where the law proved insufficient to enforce this regime, vigilante violence did the job.
Six black war veterans, claiming the rights for which they had fought overseas, were murdered in the summer of 1946.
A Mississippi mob lynched black fourteenyear-old Emmett Till in 1955 for allegedly leering at a white woman.
It is small wonder that a black clergyman declared that everywhere I go in the South the Negro is forced to choose between his hide and his soul.
In his notable book of 1944,  exposed the contradiction between Americas professed belief that all men are created equal and its sordid treatment of black citizens.
There had been token progress in race relations since the warJack Roosevelt (Jackie) Robinson, for example, had cracked the racial barrier in big-league baseball when the Brooklyn Dodgers signed him in 1947.
But for the most part, the national conscience still slumbered, and blacks still suffered.
Increasingly, however, African-Americans refused to suffer in silence.
The war had generated  a new militancy and restlessness among many  members of the black community (see Makers of America: The Great African-American Migration, pp.
892893).
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) had for years pushed doggedly to dismantle the legal underpinnings of segregation and now enjoyed some success.
In 1944 the Supreme Court ruled the white primary unconstitutional, thereby undermining the status of the Democratic party in the South as a white persons club.
And in 1950 NAACP chief legal Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness.
Little did I dream you could be so cruel as to do an injury to that lad.
If it were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, I would do so.
I like to think that I am a gentleman, but your forgiveness will have to come from someone other than me.
Have you no decency, sir, at long last?
Have you left no sense of decency?
he great social upheavals of World War II continued to transform America well after the guns  had fallen silent in 1945.
Among the groups most affected by the wars impact were African-Americans.
Predominantly a rural, southern people before 1940, African-Americans were propelled by the war into the cities of the North and West, and by 1970 a majority lived outside the states of the old Confederacy.
The results of that massive demographic shift were momentous, for African-Americans and for all of American society.
So many black southerners took to the roads during World War II that local officials lost track of their numbers.
Black workers on the move crowded into boardinghouses, camped out in cars, and clustered in the juke joints of roadside America en route to their new lives.
Southern cotton fields and tobacco plantations had historically yielded slender sustenance to African-American farmers, most of whom struggled to make ends meet as tenants or sharecroppers.
The Great Depression dealt black southerners yet another blow, for when New Deal farm programs paid growers to leave their land fallow, many landlords simply pocketed the money and evicted their tenantswhite as well as blackfrom their nowidle fields.
As the Depression deepened, dispossessed former tenants and sharecroppers toiled as seasonal farm workers or languished without jobs, without shelter, and without hope.
The spanking new munitions plants and bustling shipyards of the wartime South at first offered little solace to African-Americans.
In 1940 and 1941, the labor-hungry war machine soaked up unemployed white workers but commonly denied jobs to blacks.
When the Army constructed a training camp near Petersburg, Virginia, it imported white carpenters from all parts of the United States, rather than employ the hundreds of skilled black carpenters who lived nearby.
Fed up with such injustices, many African-Americans headed for shipyards, factories, foundries, and fields on the Pacific Coast or north of the Mason-Dixon line, where their willing hands found waiting work in abundance.
Angered by the racism that was driving their people from the South, black leaders cajoled President Roosevelt into issuing an executive order in June 1941 declaring that there shall be no discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government because of race, creed, color, or national origin.
Roosevelts action was a tenuous, hesitant step.
Yet in its way Executive Order 8802 amounted to a second Emancipation Proclamation, as the federal government for the first time since Reconstruction had committed itself to ensuring justice for African-Americans.
The entire nation was now forced to confront the evil of racism, as bloody wartime riots in Detroit, New York, Philadelphia, and other cities tragically demonstrated.
But for the first time, large numbers of blacks had a foothold in the industrial economy, and they were not about to give it up.
By wars end the great wartime exodus had scattered hundreds of thousands of African-Americans to new regions and new ways of lifea second black diaspora comparable in its scale and consequence to the original black dispersal out of Africa itself.
In the post-war decades, blacks continued to pour out of the South in search of economic opportunity and political freedom.
In western and northern cities, blacks now competed for housing and jobs, and they also votedmany of them for the first time in their lives.
As early as 1945, NAACP leader Walter White concluded that the war immeasurably magnified the Negros awareness of the disparity between the American profession and practice of democracy.
After the war, he predicted, African-Americans would be convinced that whatever betterment of their lot is achieved must come largely from their own efforts.
The wartime migration thus set the stage for the success of the civil rights movement that began to stir in the 1950s.
With their new political base outside the Old South, and with new support from the Democratic party, African-Americans eventually forced an end to the hated segregationist practices that had caused them to flee the South in the first place.
counsel Thurgood Marshall (later a Supreme Court justice), in the case of  wrung from the High Court a ruling that separate professional schools for blacks failed to meet the test of equality.
On a chilly day in December 1955, Rosa Parks, a college-educated black seamstress, made history in Montgomery, Alabama.
She boarded a bus, took a seat in the whites only section, and refused to give it up.
Her arrest for violating the citys Jim Crow statutes sparked a yearlong black boycott of the city buses and served notice throughout the South that blacks would no longer submit meekly to the absurdities and indignities of segregation.
The Montgomery bus boycott also catapulted to prominence a young pastor at Montgomerys Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr.
Barely twenty-seven years old, King seemed an unlikely champion of the downtrodden and disfranchised.
Raised in a prosperous black family in Atlanta and educated partly in the North, he had for most of his life been sheltered from the grossest cruelties of segregation.
But his oratorical skill, his passionate devotion to biblical and constitutional conceptions of justice, and his devotion to the nonviolent principles of Indias Mohandas Gandhi were destined to thrust him to the forefront of the black revolution that would soon pulse across the South and the rest of the nation.
When President Harry Truman heard about the lynching of black war veterans in 1946, he exclaimed, My God!
I had no idea it was as terrible as that.
The horrified Truman responded by commissioning a report titled To Secure These Rights.
Following the reports recommendations, Truman  in 1948 ended segregation in federal civil service and ordered equality of treatment and opportunity in the armed forces.
The military brass at first protested that the army is not a sociological laboratory, but manpower shortages in Korea forced the integration of combat units, without the predicted loss of effectiveness.
Yet Congress stubbornly resisted passing civil rights legislation, and Trumans successor, Dwight Eisenhower, showed no real signs C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 You could not go to a white restaurant; you sat in a special place at the movie house; and Lord knows, you sat in the back of the bus.
It didnt make any difference if you were rich or poor, if you were black you were nothing.
You might have a hundred dollars in your pocket, but if you went to the store you would wait at the side until all the clerks got through with all the white folks, no matter if they didnt have change for a dollar.
Then the clerk would finally look at you and say, Oh, did you want something?
I didnt see you there.
of interest in the racial issue.
Within the government that left only the judicial branch as an avenue of advancement for civil rights.
Breaking the path for civil rights progress was broad-jawed Chief Justice Earl Warren, former governor of California.
Elevated to the supreme bench by Eisenhower, Warren shocked the president and other traditionalists with his active judicial intervention in previously taboo social issues.
Publicly snubbed and privately scorned by President Eisenhower, Warren persisted in encouraging the Court to apply his straightforward populist principles.
Critics assailed this judicial activism, and Impeach Earl Warren signs blossomed along the nations highways.
But Warrens defenders argued that the Court was rightly stepping up to confront important  social issuesespecially civil rights for AfricanAmericansbecause the Congress had abdicated its responsibilities by refusing to deal with them.
When it came to fundamental rights, Warrens allies claimed, legislation by the judiciary was better than no legislation at all.
The unanimous decision of the Warren Court in May 1954 was epochal.
In a forceful opinion, the learned justices ruled that segregation in the public schools was inherently unequal and thus unconstitutional.
The uncompromising sweep of the decision startled conservatives like an exploding time bomb, for it reversed the Courts earlier declaration of 1896 in  rate but equal facilities were allowable under the Constitution.
That doctrine was now dead.
Desegregation, the justices insisted, must go ahead with all deliberate speed.
The Border States generally made reasonable efforts to comply with this ruling, but in the Deep South die-hards organized massive resistance against the Courts annulment of the sacred principle of separate but equal.
More than a hundred southern congressional representatives and senators signed the Declaration of Constitutional Principles in 1956, pledging their unyielding resistance to desegregation.
Several states diverted public funds to hastily created private schools, for there the integration order was more difficult to apply.
Throughout the South white citizens councils, sometimes with fire and hemp, thwarted attempts to make integration a reality.
Ten years after the Courts momentous ruling, fewer than 2 percent of the eligible blacks in the Deep South were sitting in classrooms with whites.
The southern translation of all deliberate speed was apparently deliberately slow.
President Eisenhower was little inclined toward promoting integration.
He shied away from employing his vast popularity and the prestige of his office to educate white Americans about the need for racial justice.
His personal attitudes may have helped to restrain him.
He had grown up in an all-white town and spent his career in a segregated army.
He had advised against integration of the armed forces in 1948 and had criticized Trumans call for a permanent Fair Employment Practices Commission.
He complained that the Supreme Courts decision in and convictions of at least two generations of Americans, and he steadfastly refused to issue a public statement endorsing the Courts conclusions.
I do not believe, he explained, that prejudices, even palpably unjustifiable prejudices, will succumb to compulsion.
But in September 1957, Ike was forced to act.
Orval Faubus, the governor of Arkansas, mobilized You see, what the bus thing did was simply more than withholding patronage from the bus; it was restoring a sense of dignity to the patrons, as best expressed by an oft-quoted black woman in Montgomery who said, Since Ive been walking, my feet are tired, but my souls rested.
[P]rior to the bus boycotts, the determination of our freedom rested with the courts.
With the bus boycott, we determined it.
The court could say what it liked, we werent gon ridein the back of the bus.
Wed walk.
the National Guard to prevent nine black students from enrolling in Little Rocks Central High School.
Confronted with a direct challenge to federal authority, Eisenhower sent troops to escort the children to their classes.
In the same year, Congress passed the first Civil Rights Act since Reconstruction days.
Eisenhower characteristically reassured a southern senator that the legislation represented the mildest civil rights bill possible.
It set up a permanent Civil Rights Commission to investigate violations of civil rights and authorized federal injunctions to protect voting rights.
Blacks meanwhile continued to take the civil rights movement into their own hands.
Martin Luther King, Jr., formed the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in 1957.
It aimed to mobilize the vast power of the black churches on C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 behalf of black rights.
This was an exceptionally shrewd strategy, because the churches were the largest and best-organized black institutions that had been allowed to flourish in a segregated society.
More spontaneous was the sit-in movement launched on February 1, 1960, by four black college freshmen in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Without  a detailed plan or institutional support, they demanded service at a whites-only Woolworths lunch counter.
Observing that fellows like you make our race look bad, the black waitress refused to serve them.
But they kept their seats and returned the next day with nineteen classmates.
The following day, eighty-five students joined in; by  the end of the week, a thousand.
Like a prairie fire, the sit-in movement burned swiftly across the South, swelling into a wave of wade-ins, lie-ins, and pray-ins to compel equal treatment in restaurants, transportation, employment, housing, and voter registration.
In April 1960 southern black students formed the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC, pronounced snick) to give more focus and force to these efforts.
Young and impassioned, SNCC members would eventually lose patience with the more stately tactics of the SCLC and the even more deliberate legalisms of the NAACP.
The balding, sixty-two-year-old General Eisenhower had entered the White House in 1953 pledging his administration to a philosophy of dynamic conservatism.
In all those things which deal with people, be liberal, be human, he advised.
But when it came to peoples money, or their economy, or their form of government, be conservative.
This balanced, middle-of-the-road course harmonized with the depression-daunted and war-weary mood of the times.
Some critics called Eisenhowers presidency a case of the bland leading the bland.
Above all, Eisenhower strove to balance the federal budget and guard the Republic from what he called creeping socialism.
The former supreme allied commander put the brakes on Trumans enormous military buildup, though defense spending still soaked up some 10 percent of the GNP.
True to his small-government philosophy, Eisenhower supported the transfer of control over offshore oil fields from the federal government to the states.
Ike also tried to curb the TVA by encouraging a private power company to build a generating plant to compete with the massive public utility spawned by the New Deal.
Speaking of the TVA, Eisenhower reportedly said, By God, if ever we could do it, before we leave here, Id like to see us  suppose we cant go that far.
Eisenhowers secretary of health, education, and welfare condemned the free distribution of the Salk antipolio vaccine as socialized medicine.
Eisenhower responded to the Mexican governments worries that illegal Mexican immigration to the United States would undercut the  gram of legally imported farmworkers inaugurated during World War II (see p.
833).
In a massive roundup of illegal immigrants, dubbed Operation Wetback in reference to the migrants watery route across the Rio Grande, as many as 1 million Mexicans were apprehended and returned to Mexico in 1954.
In yet another of the rude and arbitrary reversals that long have afflicted the governments relations with Native Americans, Eisenhower also sought to cancel the tribal preservation policies of the Indian New Deal, in place since 1934 (see  p.
790).
He proposed to terminate the tribes as legal entities and to revert to the assimilationist goals of the Dawes Severalty Act of 1887 (see p.
597).
A few tribes, notably the Klamaths of Oregon, were induced to terminate themselves.
In return for cash payments, the Klamaths relinquished all claims on their land and agreed to their legal dissolution as a tribe.
But most Indians resisted termination, and the policy was abandoned in 1961.
Eisenhower knew that he could not unscramble all the eggs that had been fried by New Dealers and Fair Dealers for twenty long years.
He pragmatically accepted and thereby legitimated many New Dealish programs, stitching them permanently into the fabric of American society.
As he told his brother, Should any political party attempt to abolish Social Security, unemployment insurance, and eliminate labor and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.
In some ways Eisenhower even did the New Deal one better.
In a public works project that dwarfed anything the New Dealers had ever dreamed of, Ike backed the Interstate Highway Act of 1956, a $27 billion plan to build forty-two thousand miles of sleek, fast motorways.
Laying down these modern, multilane roads created countless construction jobs and speeded the suburbanization of America.
The Highway Act offered juicy benefits to the trucking, automobile, oil, and travel industries, while at the same time robbing the railroads, especially passenger trains, of business.
The act also exacerbated problems of air quality and energy consumption, and had especially disastrous consequences for cities, whose once-vibrant downtowns withered away while shopping malls flourished in the far-flung suburbs.
One critic carped that the most charitable assumption about the Interstate C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 Highway Act was that Congress didnt have the faintest notion of what they were doing.
Despite his good intentions, Eisenhower managed to balance the budget only three times in his eight years in office, and in 1959 he incurred the biggest peacetime deficit thus far in American  history.
Yet critics blamed his fiscal timidity for aggravating several business recessions during  the decade, especially the sharp downturn of 19571958, which left more than 5 million workers jobless.
Economic troubles helped to revive the Democrats, who regained control of both houses of Congress in 1954.
Unemployment jitters also helped to spark the merger of the AF of L and the CIO in 1955, ending two decades of bitter division in the house of labor.
Mere containment of communism was condemned in the 1952 Republican platform as negative, futile, and immoral.
Incoming secretary of state John Foster Dullesa pious churchgoer whose sanctimonious manner was lampooned by critics as Dull, Duller, Dullespromised not merely to stem the red tide but to roll back its gains and liberate captive peoples.
At the same time, the new administration promised to balance the budget by cutting military spending.
How were these two contradictory goals to be reached?
Dulles answered with a policy of boldness in early 1954.
Eisenhower would relegate the army and the navy to the back seat and build up an air fleet of superbombers (called the Strategic Air Command, or SAC) equipped with city-flattening nuclear bombs.
These fearsome weapons would inflict massive retaliation on the Soviets or the Chinese if they got out of hand.
The advantages of this new policy were thought to be its paralyzing nuclear impact and its cheaper price tag when compared with conventional forcesmore bang for  the buck.
In 1955 Eisenhower actually threatened nuclear reprisal when Communist China shelled some small islands near the Nationalist Chinese stronghold of Taiwan.
At the same time, Eisenhower sought a thaw in the Cold War through negotiations with the new Soviet leaders who came to power after dictator Joseph Stalins death in 1953.
But the new Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, rudely rejected Ikes heartfelt proposals for peace at the Geneva summit conference in 1955.
When Ike called for open skies over both the Soviet Union and the United States to prevent either side from miscalculating the others military intentions, Khrushchev replied, This is a very transparent espionage device.
You could hardly expect us to take this seriously.
Eisenhower went home empty-handed.
In the end, the touted new look in foreign policy proved illusory.
In 1956 the Hungarians rose up against their Soviet masters and appealed in vain to the United States for aid, while Moscow reasserted its domination with the unmistakable language of force.
Embittered Hungarian freedom fighters naturally accused Uncle Sam of welshing when the chips were down.
The truth was that Americas mighty nuclear sledgehammer was too heavy a weapon to wield in such a relatively minor crisis.
The rigid futility of the massive retaliation doctrine was thus starkly exposed.
To his dismay, Eisenhower also discovered that the aerial and atomic hardware necessary for massive retaliation was staggeringly expensive.
Europe, thanks to the Marshall Plan and NATO, seemed reasonably secure by the early 1950s, but East Asia was a different can of worms.
Nationalist movements had sought for years to throw off the French colonial yoke in Indochina.
The Vietnamese leader, goateed Ho Chi Minh, had tried to appeal personally to Woodrow Wilson in Paris as early as 1919 to support self-determination for the peoples of Southeast Asia.
Franklin Roosevelt had likewise inspired hope among Asian nationalists.
Cold War events dampened the dreams of anticolonial Asian peoples.
Their leadersincluding  Ho Chi Minhbecame increasingly communist while the United States became increasingly anticommunist.
By 1954 American taxpayers were financing nearly 80 percent of the costs of a  bottomless French colonial war in Indochina.
The United States share amounted to about $1 billion a year.
Despite this massive aid, French forces continued to crumble under Viet Minh guerrilla  pressure.
In March 1954 a key French garrison was trapped hopelessly in the fortress of Dienbienphu at the northwestern corner of Vietnam.
The new policy of boldness was now put to the test.
Secretary Dulles, Vice President Nixon, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff favored intervention with American bombers to help bail out the beleaguered French.
But Eisenhower, wary about another war in Asia so soon after Korea and correctly fearing British nonsupport, held back.
Dienbienphu fell to the nationalists, and a multination conference at Geneva roughly halved Vietnam at the seventeenth parallel (see map).
The victorious Ho Chi Minh in the north consented to this arrangement on the assurance that Vietnamwide elections would be held within two years.
In the south a pro-Western government under Ngo Dinh Diem was soon entrenched at Saigon.
The Vietnamese never held the promised elections, primarily because the communists seemed certain to win, and Vietnam remained a dangerously divided country.
Eisenhower promised economic and military aid to the autocratic Diem regime, provided that it undertook certain social reforms.
Change came at a snails pace, but American aid continued, as communist guerrillas heated up their campaign against Diem.
The Americans had evidently backed a losing horse but could see no easy way to call off their bet.
The United States had initially backed the French in Indochina in part to win French approval of a plan to rearm West Germany.
Despite French fears, the Germans were finally welcomed into the NATO fold in 1955, with an expected contribution of half a million troops.
In the same year, the Eastern European countries and the Soviets signed the Warsaw Pact, creating a red military counterweight to the newly bolstered NATO forces in the West.
Despite these hardening military lines, the Cold War seemed to be thawing a bit.
Eisenhower earnestly endeavored to cage the nuclear demon by negotiating arms-control agreements with Moscow, and early signs were encouraging.
In May 1955 the Soviets rather surprisingly agreed to end the occupation of Austria.
A summit conference in July produced little progress on the burning issues, but it bred a conciliatory spirit of Geneva that caused a modest blush of optimism to pass over the face of the Western world.
Hopes rose further the following year when Soviet Communist party boss Nikita Khrushchev, a burly excoal miner, publicly denounced the bloody excesses of Joseph Stalin, the dictator dead since 1953.
Violent events late in 1956 ended the postGeneva lull.
When the liberty-loving Hungarians struck for their freedom, they were ruthlessly  overpowered by Soviet tanks.
While the Western world looked on in horror, Budapest was turned into a slaughterhouse, and thousands of Hungarian refugees fled their country in panic for the Austrian border.
The United States eventually altered its immigration laws to admit thirty thousand Hungarian fugitives.
Increasing fears of Soviet penetration into the oilrich Middle East prompted Washington to take audacious action.
The government of Iran, supposC HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 Shanghai Hong Kong Seventeenth Parallel Hanoi Saigon Singapore PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA NORTH KOREA SOUTH KOREA JAPAN INDIA BURMA LAOS CAMBODIA PHILIPPINES INDOCHINA NORTH VIETNAM SOUTH VIETNAM TAIWAN (Nationalist China) THAILAND M A L A Y A I N D O N E S I A The Far East, 19551956 edly influenced by the Kremlin, began to resist the power of the gigantic Western companies that controlled Iranian petroleum.
In response, the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) engineered a coup in 1953 that installed the youthful shah of Iran, Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, as a kind of dictator.
Though successful in the short run in securing  Iranian oil for the West, the American intervention left a bitter legacy of resentment among many  Iranians.
More than two decades later, they took their revenge on the shah and his American allies (see p.
972).
The Suez crisis proved far messier than the swift stroke in Iran.
President Nasser of Egypt, an ardent Arab nationalist, was seeking funds to build an immense dam on the upper Nile for urgently needed irrigation and power.
America and Britain tentatively offered financial help, but when Nasser began to flirt openly with the communist camp, Secretary of State Dulles dramatically withdrew the dam offer.
Nasser promptly regained face by nationalizing the Suez Canal, owned chiefly by British and French stockholders.
Nassers action placed a razors edge at the jugular vein of Western Europes oil supply.
Secretary Dulles labored strenuously to ward off armed intervention by the cornered European powersas well as by the Soviets, who threatened to match any Western invasion by pouring volunteers into Egypt and perhaps by launching nuclear attacks on Paris and London.
But the United States apprehensive French and British allies, deliberately keeping Washington in the dark and coordinating their blow with one from Israel, staged a joint assault on Egypt late in October 1956.
For a breathless week, the world teetered on the edge of the abyss.
The French and British, however, had made a fatal miscalculationthat the United States would supply them with oil while their Middle Eastern supplies were disrupted, as an oil-rich Uncle Sam had done in the two world wars.
But to their unpleasant surprise, a furious President Eisenhower resolved to let them boil in their own oil and refused to release emergency supplies.
The oilless allies resentfully withdrew their troops, and for the first time in history, a United Nations police force was sent to maintain order.
The Suez crisis also marked the last time in history that the United States could brandish its oil weapon.
As recently as 1940, the United States had produced two-thirds of the worlds oil, while a scant 5 percent of the global supply flowed from the Middle East.
But domestic American reserves had been rapidly depleted.
In 1948 the United States had become a net oil importer.
Its days as an oil power clearly were numbered as the economic and strategic importance of the Middle East oil region grew dramatically.
The U.S.
president and Congress proclaimed the Eisenhower Doctrine in 1957, pledging U.S.
military and economic aid to Middle Eastern nations threatened by communist aggression.
The real threat to U.S.
interests in the Middle East, however, was not communism but nationalism, as Nassers wild popularity among the masses of all Arab countries demonstrated.
The poor, sandy sheikdoms increasingly resolved to reap for themselves the lions share of the enormous oil wealth that Western companies pumped out of the scorching Middle Eastern deserts.
In a move with portentous implications, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, and Iran joined with Venezuela in 1960 to form the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).
In the next two decades, OPECs stranglehold on the Western economies would tighten to a degree that even Nasser could not have imagined.
The election of 1956 was a replay of the 1952 contest, with President Eisenhowerno worse for wear after a heart attack in 1955 and major abdominal surgery in 1956pitted once more against Adlai Stevenson.
Democrats were hard-pressed to find an issue with which to attack the genial general in a time of prosperity and peace, and the voters made it clear that they still liked Ike.
Eisenhower piled up an enormous majority of 35,590,472 popular votes to Stevensons 26,022,752; in the electoral college, the count was even more unbalanced at 457 to 73.
But despite the GOP national chairmans boast that any jockey would look good riding Ike, in fact the generals coattails this time were not so stiff or broad.
He failed to win for his party either house of Congressthe first time since Zachary Taylors election in 1848 that a winning president had headed such a losing ticket.
In fragile health, Eisenhower began his second term as a part-time president.
Critics charged that he kept his hands on his golf clubs, fly rod, and shotgun more often than on the levers of power.
But in his last years in office, Ike rallied himself to do less golfing and more governing.
A key area in which the president bestirred himself was labor legislation.
A drastic labor-reform bill in 1959 grew out of recurrent strikes in critical industries and scandalous revelations of gangsterism in unionist high echelons.
In particular, fraud and brass-knuckle tactics tainted the Teamsters Union.
The millionaire Teamster chief, Dave  Beck, invoked the Fifth Amendment against selfincrimination 209 times before a Senate investigatC HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
32 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
4 S.D.
4 KANSAS 8 OKLA.
9 MICH.
20 N.Y.
45 N.D.
4 MINN.
11 IOWA 10 NEBR.
6 MO.
13 ARK.
8 LA.
10 TEXAS 24 N.M.
4 MISS.
8 ALA.
11 GA.
12 FLA.
10 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 PA.
32 OHIO 25 IND.
13 ILL.
27 WISC.
12 KY.
10 ME.
5 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
16 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
16 DEL.
3 MD.
9 EisenhowerRepublican StevensonDemocratic Presidential Election of 1956 (with electoral vote by state) Eisenhower made even deeper inroads into the traditional bastion of Democratic strength, the once-solid South, than he  had in 1952.
Louisiana went Republican for the first time since Reconstruction days, in 1876. ing committee in 1957 to avoid telling what he had done with $320,000.
He was later sentenced to prison for embezzlement.
When his union defiantly elected the tough-fisted James R. Hoffa as his successor, the AF of LCIO expelled the Teamsters.
The Senate committee reported that in fifteen years, union officials had stolen or misappropriated some $10 million.
Hoffa later was jailed for jury tampering, served part of his sentence, and disappeared evidently the victim of the gangsters whom he had apparently crossed.
Even labors friends agreed that the house of labor needed a thorough housecleaning.
Congress rallied to devise a tough labor-reform bill.
Teamster boss Hoffa threatened to defeat for reelection congressional representatives who dared to vote for the proposed labor law.
Eisenhower responded with a dramatic television appeal, and Congress in 1959 passed the Landrum-Griffin Act.
It was designed to bring labor leaders to book for financial shenanigans and to prevent bullying tactics.
Seizing the opportune moment, antilaborites also forced into the bill prohibitions against secondary boycotts and certain kinds of picketing.
Soviet scientists astounded the world on October 4, 1957, by lofting into orbit around the globe a beepbeeping baby moon  pounds.
A month later they topped their own ace by sending aloft a larger satellite  1,120 pounds and carrying a dog.
This amazing scientific breakthrough shattered American self-confidence.
The Soviets had long been trying to convince the uncommitted nations that the shortcut to superior industrial production lay through communism, and the  credence to their claim.
America had seemingly taken a back seat in scientific achievement.
Envious backward nations laughed at Americas discomfiture, all the more so because the Soviets were occupying outer space while American troops were occupying the high school in Little Rock.
Military implications of these human-made satellites proved sobering.
If the Soviets could fire heavy objects into outer space, they certainly could reach America with intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
Old-soldier Eisenhower, adopting a father-knows-best attitude toward the Soviet gimmick, remarked that it should not cause one iota of concern.
Others, chiefly Republicans, blamed the Truman administration for having spent more for supporting peanut propagation than for supporting a missile program.
Agonizing soul-searching led to the conclusion that while the United States was well advanced on a broad scientific front, including color television, the Soviets had gone all out for rocketry.
Experts testified that Americas manned bombers were still a powerful deterrent, but heroic efforts were needed if the alleged missile gap was not to widen.
Rocket fever swept the nation.
Eisenhower established the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and directed billions of  dollars to missile development.
After humiliating and well-advertised failuresnotably the Vanguard missle, which blew up on national television just a few feet above the ground in 1957in February 1958 the United States managed to put into orbit a grapefruit-sized satellite weighing 2.5 pounds.
By the end of the decade, several satellites had been launched, and the United States had successfully tested its own ICBMs.
The   son of the American educational system, which was already under fire as too easygoing, with that of the Soviet Union.
A strong move now developed in the United States to replace frills with solid subjects to substitute square roots for square dancing.
Congress rejected demands for federal scholarships, but late in 1958 the National Defense and Education Act (NDEA) authorized $887 million in loans to needy college students and in grants for the improvement of teaching the sciences and  languages.
The fantastic race toward nuclear annihilation  continued unabated.
Humanity-minded scientists urged that nuclear tests be stopped before the atmosphere became so polluted as to produce generations of deformed mutants.
The Soviets, after completing an intensive series of exceptionally dirty tests, proclaimed a suspension in March 1958 and urged the Western world to follow.
Beginning in October 1958, Washington did halt both underground and atmospheric testing.
But attempts to regularize such suspensions by proper inspection sank on the reef of mutual mistrust.
Thermonuclear suicide seemed nearer in July 1958, when both Egyptian and communist plottings threatened to engulf Western-oriented Lebanon.
After its president had called for aid under the Eisenhower Doctrine, the United States boldly landed several thousand troops and helped restore order without taking a single life.
The burly Khrushchev, seeking new propaganda laurels, was eager to meet with Eisenhower and pave the way for a summit conference with Western leaders.
Despite grave misgivings as to any tangible results, the president invited him to America in 1959.
Arriving in New York, Khrushchev appeared before the U.N.
General Assembly and dramatically resurrected the ancient Soviet proposal of complete disarmament.
But he offered no practical means of achieving this end.
A result of this tour was a meeting at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland.
Khrushchev emerged saying that his ultimatum for the evacuation of Berlin would be extended indefinitely.
The relieved world gave prayerful but premature thanks for the spirit of Camp David.
The Camp David spirit quickly evaporated when the follow-up Paris summit conference, scheduled for May 1960, turned out to be an incredible fiasco.
Both Moscow and Washington had publicly taken a firm stand on the burning Berlin issue, and neither could risk a public  backdown.
Then, on the eve of the conference, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down deep in the heart of Russia.
After bungling bureaucratic denials in Washington, honest Ike took the unprecedented step of assuming personal responsibility.
Khrushchev stormed C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 into Paris filling the air with invective, and the conference collapsed before it could get off the ground.
The concord of Camp David was replaced with the grapes of wrath.
Latin Americans bitterly resented Uncle Sams lavishing of billions of dollars on Europe, while doling out only millions to the poor relations to the south.
They also chafed at Washingtons continuing  habit of intervening in Latin American affairsas in a CIA-directed coup that ousted a leftist government in Guatemala in 1954.
On the other hand, Washington continued to supporteven decoratebloody dictators who claimed to be combating communists.
Most ominous of all was the communist beachhead in Cuba.
The ironfisted dictator Fulgencio Batista had encouraged huge investments of American capital, and Washington in turn had given him some support.
When black-bearded Dr.
Fidel Castro engineered a revolution early in 1959, he denounced the Yankee imperialists and began to expropriate valuable American properties in pursuing a land-distribution program.
Washington, finally losing patience, released Cuba from imperialistic slavery by cutting off the heavy U.S.
imports of Cuban sugar.
Castro retaliated with further wholesale confiscations of Yankee property and in effect made his left-wing dictatorship an economic and military satellite of Moscow.
An exodus of antiCastro Cubans headed for the United States, especially Florida.
Nearly 1 million arrived between 1960 and 2000.
Washington broke diplomatic relations with Cuba early in 1961.
Americans talked seriously of invoking the Monroe Doctrine before the Soviets set up a communist base only ninety miles from their shores.
Khrushchev angrily proclaimed that the Monroe Doctrine was dead and indicated that he would shower missiles upon the United States if it attacked his good friend Castro.
The Cuban revolution, which Castro sought to export to his neighbors, brought other significant responses.
At San Jose, Costa Rica, in August 1960, the United States induced the Organization of American States to condemn (unenthusiastically) communist infiltration into the Americas.
President Eisenhower, whom Castro dubbed the senile White House golfer, hastily proposed a long-deferred Marshall Plan for Latin America.
Congress responded to his recommendation with an initial authorization of $500 million.
The Latin Americans had Castro to thank for attention that many of them regarded as too little and too late.
As Republicans approached the presidential campaign of 1960, Vice President Nixon was their heir apparent.
To many he was a gifted party leader, to others a ruthless opportunist.
The old Nixon had been a no-holds-barred campaigner, especially in assailing Democrats and left-wingers.
The new Nixon was represented as a mature, seasoned statesman.
More in the limelight than any earlier vice president, he had shouldered heavy responsibilities and had traveled globally as a troubleshooter in various capacities.
He had vigorously defended American democracy in a famous kitchen debate with Khrushchev in Moscow in 1959.
His supporters, flourishing a telling photograph of this finger-pointing episode, claimed that he alone knew how to stand up to the Soviets.
Nixon was nominated unanimously on the first ballot in Chicago.
His running mate was the patrician Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., of Massachusetts (grandson of Woodrow Wilsons arch-foe), who had served conspicuously for seven years as the U.S.
representative to the United Nations.
By contrast, the Democratic race for the presidential nomination started as a free-for-all.
John F. Kennedya tall, youthful, tooth-flashing millionaire senator from Massachusettswon impressive victories in the primaries.
He then scored a firstballot triumph in Los Angeles over his closest rival, Senator Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate majority leader from Texas.
A disappointed South was not completely appeased when Johnson accepted second place on the ticket in an eleventh-hour marriage of convenience.
Kennedys challenging acceptance speech called upon the American people for sacrifices to achieve their potential greatness, which he hailed as the New Frontier.
Bigotry inevitably showed its snarling face.
Senator Kennedy was a Roman Catholic, the first to be nominated since Al Smiths ill-starred campaign in 1928.
Smear artists revived the ancient charges about  the Popes controlling the White House.
Kennedy pointed to his fourteen years of service in Congress, denied that he would be swayed by Rome, and asked if some 40 million Catholic Americans were to be condemned to second-class citizenship from birth.
Kennedys Catholicism aroused misgivings in the Protestant, Bible Belt South, which was ordinarily Democratic.
I fear Catholicism more than I fear communism, declaimed one Baptist minister in North Carolina.
But the religious issue largely canceled itself out.
If many southern Democrats stayed away from the polls because of Kennedys Catholicism, northern Democrats in unusually large numbers supported Kennedy because of the bitter attacks on their Catholic faith.
Kennedy charged that the Soviets, with their nuclear bombs and circling  America in prestige and power.
Nixon, forced to defend the dying administration, insisted that the nations prestige had not slipped, although Kennedy was causing it to do so by his unpatriotic talk.
Television may well have tipped the scales.
Nixon agreed to meet Kennedy in four so-called debates.
The contestants crossed words in millions of living rooms before audiences estimated at 60 million or more.
Nobody won the debates.
But Kennedy at least held his own and did not suffer by comparison with the more experienced Nixon.
The debates demonstrated the importance of image in a television age.
Many viewers found Kennedys glamour and vitality far more appealing than Nixons tired and pallid appearance.
Kennedy squeezed through by the rather comfortable margin of 303 electoral votes to 219,* but with the breathtakingly close popular margin of only 118,574 votes out of over 68 million cast.
Like Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy ran well in the large industrial centers, where he had strong support from workers, Catholics, and African-Americans.
(He had solicitously telephoned the pregnant Coretta King, whose husband, Martin Luther King, Jr., was then imprisoned in Georgia for a sit-in.
) C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 I believe in an America where the separation of church and state is absolutewhere no Catholic prelate would tell the President, should he be a Catholic, how to act, and no Protestant minister would tell his parishioners for whom to vote .
and where no man is denied public office because his religion differs from the President who might appoint him or the people who might elect him.
*Six Democratic electors in Alabama, all eight unpledged Democratic electors in Mississippi, and one Republican elector in Oklahoma voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd.
Although losing a few seats, the Democrats swept both houses of Congress by wide margins.
John Fitzgerald Kennedythe youngest man to date and the first Catholic to be elected presidentwas free to set out for his New Frontier, provided that the die-hard conservatives in his party would join the wagon train.
President Eisenhower continued to enjoy extraordinary popularity to the final curtain.
Despite Democratic jibes about eight years of golfing and goofing, of putting and puttering, Eisenhower was universally admired and respected for his dignity, decency, sincerity, goodwill, and moderation.
Pessimists had predicted that Eisenhower would be a seriously crippled lame duck during his second term, owing to the barrier against reelection erected by the Twenty-second Amendment, ratified in 1951.
(See the Appendix.
) In truth, he displayed more vigor, more political know-how, and more aggressive leadership during his last two years as president than ever before.
For an unprecedented six years, from 1955 to 1961, Congress remained in Democratic hands, yet Eisenhower exerted unusual control over the legislative branch.
He wielded the veto 169 times, and only twice was his nay overridden by the required two-thirds vote.
America was fabulously prosperous in the Eisenhower years, despite pockets of poverty and unemployment, recurrent recessions, and perennial farm problems.
Old Glory could now proudly display fifty stars.
Alaska attained statehood in 1959, as did Hawaii.
Alaska, though gigantic, was thinly populated and noncontiguous, but these objections were overcome in a Democratic Congress that expected Alaska to vote Democratic.
Hawaii had ample population (largely of Asian descent), advanced democratic institutions, and more acreage than the mainland states of Rhode Island, Delaware, or Connecticut.
Though a crusading general, Eisenhower as president mounted no moral crusade for civil rights.
This was perhaps his greatest failing.
Yet he was no bigot, and he had done far more than grin away problems and tread water.
As a Republican president, he had further woven the reforms of the Democratic New Deal and Fair Deal into the fabric of national life.
As a former general, he had exercised wise restraint in his use of military power and had soberly guided foreign policy away from countless threats to peace.
The old soldier left office crestfallen at his failure to end the arms race with the Soviets.
Yet he had ended one war and avoided all others.
As the decades lengthened, appreciation of him grew.
KennedyDemocratic NixonRepublican Byrd WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
32 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
4 ALASKA 3 S.D.
4 KANSAS 8 OKLA.
7 MICH.
20 N.Y.
45 N.D.
4 MINN.
11 IOWA 10 NEBR.
6 MO.
13 ARK.
8 LA.
10 TEXAS 24 N.M.
4 MISS.
8 5 ALA.
6 GA.
12 FLA.
10 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W. VA.
8 MD.
9 PA.
32 OHIO 25 IND.
13 ILL.
27 WISC.
12 KY.
10 ME.
5 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
16 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
16 DEL.
3 HAWAII 3 1 Presidential Election of 1960 (with electoral vote by state) Kennedy owed his hairbreadth triumph to his victories in twentysix of the forty largest citiesand to Lyndon Johnsons strenuous campaigning in the South, where Kennedys Catholicism may have been a hotter issue than his stand on civil rights.
The continuing postWorld War II economic boom wrought wondrous changes in American society in the 1950s.
Prosperity triggered a fabulous surge in home construction, as a nation of renters became a nation of homeowners.
One of every four homes standing in America in 1960 had been built during the 1950s, and 83 percent of those new homes were in suburbia.
More than ever, science and technology drove economic growth.
The invention of the transistor in 1948 sparked a revolution in electronics, and especially in computers.
The first electronic computers assembled in the 1940s were massive machines with hundreds of miles of wiring and thousands of fickle cathode ray tubes.
Transistors and, later, printed circuits on silicon wafers made possible dramatic miniaturization and phenomenal computational speed.
Computer giant International Business Machines (IBM) expanded robustly, becoming  prototype of the high-tech corporation in the dawning information age.
Eventually, personal computers and even inexpensive pocket calculators contained more computing power than roomsize early models.
Computers transformed ageold business practices like billing and inventory control and opened genuine new frontiers in areas like airline scheduling, high-speed printing, and telecommunications.
Aerospace industries also grew fantastically in the 1950s, thanks both to Eisenhowers aggressive buildup of the Strategic Air Command and to a robustly expanding passenger airline business and to the connections between military and civilian aircraft production.
In 1957 the Seattle-based Boeing Company brought out the first large passenger jet, the 707.
Its design owed much to the previous development of SACs long-range strategic bomber, the B-52.
Two years later Boeing delivered the first presidential jet, a specially modified 707.
Air Force One dazzled President Eisenhower with its speed and comfort.
The nature of the work force was also changing.
A sort of quiet revolution was marked in 1956 when white-collar workers for the first time outnumbered blue-collar workers, signaling the passage from an industrial to a postindustrial era.
Keeping pace with that fundamental transformation, organized labor withered along with the smokestack industries that had been its sustenance.
Union membership as a percentage of the labor force C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience.
In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex.
peaked at about 35 percent in 1954 and then went into steady decline.
Some observers concluded that the union movement had played out its historic role of empowering workers and ensuring economic justice, and that unions would eventually disappear altogether in the postindustrial era.
The surge in white-collar employment opened special opportunities for women.
When World War II ended, most women, including those who had worked in war plants, returned to highly conventional female roles as wives and mothersthe remarkably prolific mothers of the huge babyboom generation.
A cult of domesticity emerged in popular culture to celebrate those eternal feminine functions.
When 1950s television programs like Ozzie and Harriet or Leave It to Beaver depicted idyllic suburban families with a working husband, two children, and a wife who did not work outside the home, they did so without irony; much of middle-class America really did live that way.
But as the 1950s progressed, another quiet revolution was gaining momentum that was destined to transform womens roles and even the character of the American family.
Of some 40 million new jobs created in the three decades after 1950, more than 30 million were in clerical and service work.
Women filled the huge majority of these new positions.
They were the principal employment beneficiaries of the postwar era, creating an extensive pink-collar ghetto of occupations that were dominated by women.
Exploding employment opportunities for women in the 1950s unleashed a groundswell of social and psychological shocks that mounted to tidal-wave proportions in the decades that followed.
From one perspective, womens surge into the workplace was nothing new at all, but only a return to the days when the United States was an agricultural nation, and men and women alike toiled on the family farm.
But the urban age was not the agricultural age, and womens new dual role as  ers  family life and about traditional definitions of gender differences.
Total white-collar 17.8% 38.8% 44.9% 52.5% 65.6% 73.8% workers  Clerical workers 4.0 18.7 21.5 28.7 30.5 38.9 Manual workers 27.8 23.8 21.6 18.0 14.8 9.7 Farm workers 18.9 13.5 4.0 1.8 1.0 1.0 Service workers  35.5 23.9 29.4 21.9 18.1 15.4 *Major categories; percentage of all women workers, age fourteen and older, in each category.
Includes clerical, sales, professional, and technical workers, managers and officials.
Includes domestic servants.
(Sources:  relevant years.
) Per centage of women age 16 and over in the labor for ce since 1900 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 99 2008 (est.
) 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Women in the Labor Force, 19002008 (est.
) (Sources:  and relevant years.
) Feminist Betty Friedan gave focus and fuel to womens feelings in 1963 when she published  classic of feminist protest literature that launched the modern womens movement.
Friedan spoke in rousing accents to millions of able, educated women who applauded her indictment of the stifling boredom of suburban housewifery.
Many of those women were already working for wages, but they were also struggling against the guilt and frustration of leading an unfeminine life as defined by the postwar cult of domesticity.
C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 The 1950s witnessed a huge expansion of the middle class and the blossoming of a consumer culture.
Diners Club introduced the plastic credit card in 1950, and four years later the first McDonalds hamburger stand opened in San Bernardino, California.
Also in 1955, Disneyland opened its doors in Anaheim, California.
These innovationseasy credit, high-volume fast-food production, and new forms of recreationwere harbingers of an emerging new lifestyle of leisure and affluence that was in full flower by the decades end.
Crucial to the development of that lifestyle was the rapid rise of the new technology of television.
Only 6 TV stations were broadcasting in 1946; a decade later 442 stations were operating.
TV sets were rich peoples novelties in the 1940s, but 7 million sets were sold in 1951.
By 1960 virtually every American home had one, in a stunning display of the speed with which new technologies can pervade and transform modern societies.
Attendance at movies sank as the entertainment industry changed its focus from the silver screen to the picture tube.
By the mid-1950s, advertisers annually spent $10 billion to hawk their wares on television, while critics fumed that the wildly popular new mass medium was degrading the publics aesthetic, social, moral, political, and educational standards.
To the question, Why is television called a medium?
pundits replied, Because its never rare or well done.
Even religion capitalized on the powerful new electronic pulpit.
Televangelists like the Baptist Billy Graham, the Pentecostal Holiness preacher Oral Roberts, and the Roman Catholic Fulton J. Sheen took to the airwaves to spread the Christian gospel.
Television also catalyzed the commercialization of professional sports, as viewing audiences that once numbered in the stadium-capacity thousands could now be counted in the couch-potato millions.
Sports also reflected the shift in population toward the West and South.
In 1958 baseballs New York Giants moved to San Francisco and the Brooklyn Dodgers abandoned Flatbush for Los Angeles.
Those moves touched off a new westward movement of sports franchises.
Shifting population and spreading affluence led eventually to substantial expansion of the major baseball leagues and the principal football and basketball leagues as well.
Popular music was dramatically  transformed in the fifties.
The chief revolutionary was Elvis Presley, a white singer born in 1935 in Tupelo, Mississippi.
Fusing black rhythm and blues with white bluegrass and country styles, Elvis created a new musical idiom known forever after as rock and roll.
Rock was crossover music, carrying its heavy beat and driving rhythms across the cultural divide that separated black and white musical traditions.
Listening and dancing to it became a kind of religious rite for the millions of baby boomers coming of age in the 1950s, and Presleywith his fleshy face, pouting lips, and antic, sexually suggestive gyrationswas its high priest.
Bloated by fame, fortune, and drugs, he died in 1977 at the age of forty-two.
Traditionalists were repelled by Presley, and they found much more to upset them in the affluent fifties.
Movie star Marilyn Monroe, with her ingenuous smile and mandolin-curved hips, helped to popularizeand commercializenew standards of sensuous sexuality.
So did  published in 1955.
As the decade closed, Americans were well on their way to becoming free-spending consumers of mass-produced, standardized products, which were advertised on the electronic medium of television and often sold for their alleged sexual allure.
Many critics lamented the implications of this new consumerist lifestyle.
Harvard sociologist David Riesman portrayed the postwar generation as a pack of conformists in  did William H. Whyte, Jr., in  Novelist Sloan Wilson explored a similar theme in economist John Kenneth Galbraith questioned the relation between private wealth and the public good in a series of books beginning with  Galbraith claimed, had produced a troublesome combination of private opulence amid public squalor.
Americans had televisions in their homes but garbage in their streets.
They ate rich food but breathed foul air.
Galbraiths call for social spending to match private purchasing proved highly influential in the 1960s.
Sociologist Daniel Bell, in  C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 even deeper paradoxes of prosperity.
The hedonistic consumer ethic of modern capitalism, he argued, might undermine the older work ethic and thus destroy capitalisms very productive capacity.
Collusion at the highest levels of the military-industrial complex was the subject of  an influential piece of modern muckraking by radical sociologist C. Wright Mills, who became a hero to New Left student activists in the 1960s.
Americas affluence in the heady postWorld War II decades was matched by a mother lode of literary gems.
In fiction writing some of the prewar realists continued to ply their trade, notably Ernest Hemingway in  reate in 1954, Hemingway was dead by his own duck gun in 1961.
John Steinbeck, another prewar writer who persisted in graphic portrayals of American society, such as  in 1962, the seventh American to be so honored.
Curiously, World War II did not inspire the same kind of literary outpouring that World War I had.
Searing realism, the trademark style of war writers in the 1920s, characterized the earliest novels that portrayed soldierly life in World War II, such as Norman Mailers  James Joness  time passed, realistic writing fell from favor.
Authors tended increasingly to write about the war in fantastic and even psychedelic prose.
Joseph Hellers and anguish of American airmen in the wartime Mediterranean.
A savage satire, it made readers hurt when they laughed.
The supercharged imagination of Kurt Vonnegut, Jr., poured forth works of puzzling complexity in sometimes impenetrably inventive prose, including the dark comedy war tale  The dilemmas created by the new mobility and affluence of American life were explored by Pennsylvania-born John Updike in books like  (1960) and  bred John Cheever in  and  wrote elegantly about upper-class New Yorkers.
Gore Vidal penned a series of intriguing historical novels, as well as several impish and always iconoclastic works, including  about a reincarnated transsexual.
Together, these writers constituted the rear guard of an older, WASP (white Angle-Saxon Protestant) elite that had long dominated American writing.
Poetry also flowered in the postwar era, though poets were often highly critical, even deeply despairing, about the character of American life.
Older poets were still active, including cantankerous Ezra Pound, jailed after the war in a U.S.
Army detention center near Pisa, Italy, for alleged collaboration with the Fascists.
Connecticut insurance executive Wallace Stevens and New Jersey pediatrician William Carlos Williams continued after 1945 to pursue second careers as prolific poets of worldclass stature.
But younger poets were coming to the fore during the postwar period.
Pacific northwesterner Theodore Roethke wrote lyrically about the land until his death by drowning in Puget Sound in 1963.
Robert Lowell, descended from a long line of patrician New Englanders, sought to apply the wisdom of the Puritan past to the perplexing present in allegorical poems like  Troubled Sylvia Plath crafted the moving verses of turbing novel,  cut short when she took her own life in 1963.
Anne Sexton produced brooding autobiographical poems until her death by apparent suicide in 1974.
Another brilliant poet of the period, John Berryman, ended it all in 1972 by leaping from a Minneapolis bridge onto the frozen bank of the Mississippi River.
Writing poetry seemed to be a dangerous pursuit in modern America.
The life of the poet, it was said, began in sadness and ended in madness.
Playwrights were also active.
Tennessee Williams wrote a series of searing dramas about psychological misfits struggling to hold themselves together amid the disintegrating forces of modern life.
Noteworthy were  (1947) and  Miller brought to the stage searching probes of American values, notably  (1949) and  Salem witch trials as a dark parable warning against the dangers of McCarthyism.
Lorraine Hansberry offered an affecting portrait of African-American life in   Albee exposed the rapacious underside of middleclass life in  Books by black authors also made the bestseller lists, beginning with Richard Wrights chilling portrait of a black Chicago killer in  (1940).
Ralph Ellison depicted the black individuals quest for personal identity in  one of the most haunting novels of the postwar era.
James Baldwin won plaudits as a novelist and essayist, particularly for his sensitive reflections on the racial question in  nationalist LeRoi Jones, who changed his name to Imamu Amiri Baraka, crafted powerful plays like The South boasted a literary renaissance, led by veteran Mississippi author William Faulkner, who was a Nobel recipient in 1950.
Fellow Mississippians Walker Percy and Eudora Welty grasped the falling torch from the failing Faulkner, who died in 1962.
Tennessean Robert Penn Warren immortalized C HAPTER 38 The Eisenhower Era, 19521960 Louisiana politico Huey Long in  (1946).
Flannery OConnor wrote perceptively of her native Georgia, and Virginian William Styron confronted the harsh history of his home state in a controversial fictional representation of an 1831 slave rebellion,  Especially bountiful was the harvest of books by Jewish novelists.
Some critics quipped that a knowledge of Yiddish was becoming necessary to understand much of the dialogue presented in modern American novels.
J. D. Salinger painted an unforgettable portrait of a sensitive, upper-class, AngloSaxon adolescent in  other Jewish writers found their favorite subject matter in the experience of lowerand middle-class Jewish immigrants.
Bernard Malamud rendered a touching portrait of a family of New York Jewish storekeepers in  explored the mythic qualities of the culture of baseball in  cally about young New Jersey suburbanites in  account of a sexually obsessed middle-aged New Yorker in  Saul Bellow contributed masterful sketches of Jewish urban and literary life in landmark books like (1962).
Bellow became the eighth American Nobel laureate for literature in 1977.
Isaac Bashevis Singer immigrated to America from Poland in the 1930s and continued to write in Yiddish.
He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1978.
E. L. Doctorow employed Old Testament themes in his fictional account of atomic spies Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, tively recast other modern historical materials in books like  Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Hemingway publishes  CIA-engineered coup installs shah of Iran French defeated in Vietnam Army-McCarthy hearings SEATO formed First McDonalds hamburger stand opens CIA-sponsored coup in Guatemala Montgomery bus boycott by blacks begins; emergence of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Geneva summit meeting Warsaw Pact signed AF of L merges with CIO Tennessee Williamss  first performed Soviets crush Hungarian revolt Suez crisis Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for presidency Mills publishes  Little Rock school desegregation crisis Civil Rights Act passed Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) formed Eisenhower Doctrine Soviet Union launches  U.S.
troops sent to Lebanon NDEA authorizes loans and grants for science and language education Galbraith publishes  Berlin crisis Castro leads Cuban revolution Landrum-Griffin Act Alaska and Hawaii attain statehood Sit-in movement for civil rights begins U-2 incident sabotages Paris summit OPEC formed Kennedy defeats Nixon for presidency For further reading, see page A26 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Stormy Sixties  19601968 J OHN F. K ENNEDY , I NAUGURAL 1961 C omplacent and comfortable as the 1950s closed, Americans elected in 1960 a young, vigorous president who pledged to get the country moving again.
Neither the nation nor the new president had any inkling as the new decade opened just how action-packed it would be, both at home and abroad.
The 1960s would bring a sexual revolution, a civil rights revolution, the emergence of a youth culture, a devastating war in Vietnam, and the beginnings, at least, of a feminist revolution.
By the end of the stormy sixties, many Americans would yearn nostalgically for the comparative calm of the fifties.
Hatless and topcoatless in the twenty-two-degree chill, John F. Kennedy delivered a stirring inaugural address on January 20, 1961.
Tall, elegantly handsome, speaking crisply and with staccato finger jabs at the air, Kennedy personified the glamour and vitality of the new administration.
The youngest president ever elected, he assembled one of the youngest cabinets, including his thirty-five-year-old brother, Robert, as attorney general.
Bobby, the president quipped, would find some legal experience useful when he began to practice law.
The new attorney general set out, among other reforms, to recast the priorities of the FBI.
The bureau deployed nearly a thousand agents on internal security work but targeted only a dozen against organized crime and gave virtually no attention to civil rights violations.
Robert Kennedys efforts were stoutly resisted by J. Edgar Hoover, who had served as FBI director longer than the new attorney general had been alive.
Business whiz Robert S. McNamara left the presidency of the Ford Motor Company to take over the Defense Department.
Along with other youthful, talented advisers, these appointees made up an inner circle of the best and the brightest men around the president.
From the outset Kennedy inspired high expectations, especially among the young.
His challenge of a New Frontier quickened patriotic pulses.
He brought a warm heart to the Cold War when he proposed the Peace Corps, an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring American skills to underdeveloped countries.
He summoned citizens to service with his clarion call to ask not what your country can do for you: ask what you can do for your country.
Himself Harvard-educated, Kennedy and his Ivy League lieutenants (heavily from Harvard) radiated confidence in their abilities.
The presidents personal grace and wit won him the deep affection of many of his fellow citizens.
A journalist called Kennedy the most seductive man Ive ever met.
He exuded a sense of vibrant life and humor that seemed naturally to bubble up out of him.
In an unprecedented gesture, he invited white-maned poet Robert Frost to speak at his inaugural ceremonies.
The old Yankee versifier shrewdly took stock of the situation.
Youre something of Irish and I suppose something of Harvard, he told Kennedyand advised him to be more Irish than Harvard.
Kennedy came into office with fragile Democratic majorities in Congress.
Southern Democrats threatened to team up with Republicans and ax New Frontier proposals such as medical assistance for the aged and increased federal aid to education.
Kennedy won a first round in his campaign for a more cooperative Congress when he forced an expansion of the allimportant House Rules Committee, dominated by conservatives who could have bottled up his entire legislative program.
Despite this victory, the New Frontier did not expand swiftly.
Key medical and education bills remained stalled in Congress.
Another vexing problem was the economy.
Kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the Eisenhower years.
While his advisers debated the best kind of economic medicine to apply, the president tried to hold the line against crippling inflation.
His For a moment, it seemed as if the entire country, the whole spinning globe, rested, malleable and receptive, in our beneficent hands.
administration helped negotiate a noninflationary wage agreement in the steel industry in early 1962.
The assumption was that the companies, for their part, would keep the lid on prices.
Almost immediately, steel management announced significant price increases, thereby seemingly demonstrating bad faith.
The president erupted in wrath, remarking that his father had once said that all businessmen were sons of bitches.
He called the big steel men onto the Oval Office carpet and unleashed his Irish temper.
Overawed, the steel operators backed down, while displaying S.O.B.
buttons, meaning Sons of Business or Save Our Business.
The steel episode provoked fiery attacks by big business on the New Frontier, but Kennedy soon appealed to believers in free enterprise when he announced his support of a general tax-cut bill.
He rejected the advice of those who wished greater  government spending and instead chose to stimulate the economy by slashing taxes and putting more money directly into private hands.
When he announced his policy before a big business group, one observer called it the most Republican speech since McKinley.
For economic stimulus, as well as for military strategy and scientific prestige, Kennedy also promoted a multibillion-dollar project to land an American on the moon.
When skeptics objected that the money could best be spent elsewhere, Kennedy answered them in a speech at Rice University in Texas: But why, some say, the moon?
And they may well ask, why climb the highest mountain?
Why, thirty-five years ago, fly the Atlantic?
Why does Rice play Texas?
Twenty-four billion dollars later, in 1969, two American astronauts triumphantly planted human footprints on the moons dusty surface.
A few months after settling into the White House, the new president met Soviet premier Khrushchev at Vienna in June 1961.
The tough-talking Soviet leader adopted a belligerent attitude, threatening to make a treaty with East Germany and cut off Western access to Berlin.
Though visibly shaken, the president refused to be bullied.
C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 The Soviets backed off from their most bellicose threats but suddenly began to construct the Berlin Wall in August 1961.
A barbed-wire and concrete barrier, it was designed to plug the heavy population drain from East Germany to West Germany through the Berlin funnel.
But to the free world, the Wall of Shame looked like a gigantic enclosure around a concentration camp.
The Wall stood for almost three decades as an ugly scar symbolizing the postWorld War II division of Europe into two hostile camps.
Kennedy meanwhile turned his attention to Western Europe, now miraculously prospering after the tonic of Marshall Plan aid and the growth of the American-encouraged Common Market, the freetrade area later called the European Union.
He finally secured passage of the Trade Expansion Act in 1962, authorizing tariff cuts of up to 50 percent to promote trade with Common Market countries.
This legislation led to the so-called Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations, concluded in 1967, and to a significant expansion of European-American trade.
But not all of Kennedys ambitious designs for Europe were realized.
American policymakers were dedicated to an economically and militarily united Atlantic Community, with the United States the dominant partner.
But they found their way blocked by towering, stiff-backed Charles de Gaulle, president of France.
He was suspicious of American intentions in Europe and on fire to recapture the he vetoed British application for Common Market membership in 1963, fearing that the British special relationship with the United States would make Britain a Trojan horse for deepening American control over European affairs.
He likewise dashed cold water on a U.S.
proposal to develop a multinational nuclear arm within NATO.
De Gaulle deemed the Americans unreliable in a crisis, so he tried to preserve French freedom of action by developing his own small atomic force (farce, scoffed his critics).
Despite the perils of nuclear proliferation or Soviet domination, de Gaulle demanded an independent Europe, free of Yankee influence.
Special problems for U.S.
foreign policy emerged from the worldwide decolonization of European overseas possessions after World War II.
The African Congo received its independence from Belgium in 1960 and immediately exploded into violence.
The United Nations sent in a peacekeeping force, to which Washington contributed much money but no manpower.
The United States was picking up the tab for U.N.
operations, while the organization itself was becoming dominated by the numerous nascent nations emerging in once-colonial Asia and Africa, which were often critical of U.S.
foreign policy.
Sparsely populated Laos, freed of its French colonial overlords in 1954, was festering dangerously by the time Kennedy came into office.
The Eisenhower administration had drenched this jungle kingdom with dollars but failed to cleanse the country of an aggressive communist element.
A red Laos, many observers feared, would be a river on which the influence of Communist China would flood into all of Southeast Asia.
As the Laotian civil war raged, Kennedys military advisers seriously considered sending in American troops.
But the president found that he had insufficient forces to put out the fire in Asia and still honor his commitments in Europe.
Kennedy thus sought a diplomatic escape hatch in the fourteenpower Geneva conference, which imposed a shaky peace on Laos in 1962.
These brushfire wars intensified the pressure for a shift away from Secretary Dulless dubious doctrine of massive retaliation.
Kennedy felt hamstrung by the knowledge that in a crisis, he had the Devils choice between humiliation and nuclear incineration.
With Defense Secretary McNamara, he pushed the strategy of flexible responsethat is, developing an array of military options that could be precisely matched to the gravity of the crisis at hand.
To this end Kennedy increased spending on conventional military forces and bolstered the Special Forces (Green Berets).
They were an elite antiguerrilla outfit trained to survive on snake meat and to kill with scientific finesse.
The doctrine of flexible response seemed sane enough, but it contained lethal logic.
It potentially lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way to shooting.
It also provided a mechanism for a progressive, and possibly endless, stepping-up of the use of force.
Vietnam soon presented grisly proof of these pitfalls.
The corrupt, right-wing Diem government in Saigon, despite a deluge of American dollars, had ruled shakily since the partition of Vietnam in 1954 (see p.
900).
Anti-Diem agitators noisily threatened to topple the pro-American government from power.
In a fateful decision late in 1961, Kennedy ordered a sharp increase in the number of military advisers (U.S.
troops) in South Vietnam.
American forces had allegedly entered Vietnam to foster political stabilityto help protect Diem from the communists long enough to allow him to enact basic social reforms favored by the Americans.
But the Kennedy administration eventually despaired of the reactionary Diem and encouraged a successful coup against him in November 1963.
Ironically, the United States thus contributed to a long process of political disintegration that its original policy had meant to prevent.
Kennedy still told the South Vietnamese that it was their war, but  he had made dangerously deep political commitC HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 ments.
By the time of his death, he had ordered more than fifteen thousand American men into the far-off Asian slaughterpen.
A graceful pullout was becoming increasingly difficult.
Although the United States regarded Latin America as its backyard, its southern neighbors feared and resented the powerful Colossus of the North.
In 1961 Kennedy extended the hand of friendship with the Alliance for Progress  hailed as a Marshall Plan for Latin America.
A primary goal was to help the Good Neighbors close the gap between the callous rich and the wretched poor, and thus quiet communist agitation.
But results were disappointing; there was little alliance and even less progress.
American handouts had little positive impact on Latin Americas immense social problems.
President Kennedy also struck below the border with the mailed fist.
He had inherited from the Eisenhower administration a CIA-backed scheme to topple Fidel Castro from power by invading Cuba with anticommunist exiles.
Trained and armed by Americans and supported by American air power, the invaders would trigger a popular uprising in Cuba and sweep to victoryor so the planners predicted.
On April 17, 1961, some twelve hundred exiles landed at Cubas Bay of Pigs.
Kennedy had decided from the outset against  ancient aircraft of the anti-Castroites were no match Vietnam and Southeast Asia, 19541975 for Castros air force.
In addition, no popular uprising greeted the invaders.
With the invasion bogged down at the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy stood fast in his decision to keep hands off, and the bullet-riddled band of anti-Castroites surrendered.
Most of the invaders rotted for two years in Cuban jails but  were eventually ransomed for some $62 million worth of American pharmaceutical drugs and  other humanitarian supplies.
President Kennedy assumed full responsibility for the failure, remarking that victory has a hundred fathers, and defeat is an orphan.
The Bay of Pigs blunder, along with continuing American covert efforts to assassinate Castro and overthrow his government, naturally pushed the Cuban leader even further into the Soviet embrace.
Wily Chairman Khrushchev lost little time in taking full advantage of his Cuban comrades position just ninety miles off Floridas coast.
In October 1962 the aerial photographs of American spy planes revealed that the Soviets were secretly and speedily installing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba.
The Soviets evidently intended to use these devastating weapons to shield Castro and to blackmail the United States into backing down in Berlin and other trouble spots.
Kennedy and Khrushchev now began a nerveracking game of nuclear chicken.
The president flatly rejected air force proposals for a surgical bombing strike against the missile-launching sites.
Instead, on October 22, 1962, he ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of the threatening weaponry.
He also served notice on Khrushchev that any attack on the United States from Cuba would be regarded as coming from the Soviet Union and would trigger nuclear retaliation against the Russian heartland.
For an anxious week, Americans waited while Soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the U.S.
Navy off the island of Cuba.
Seizing or sinking a Soviet vessel on the high seas would unquestionably be regarded by the Kremlin as an act of war.
The world teetered breathlessly on the brink of global atomization.
Only in 1991 did the full dimensions of this nuclear peril become known, when the Russians revealed that their ground forces in Cuba already had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal and were authorized to launch them if attacked.
In this tense eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation, Khrushchev finally flinched.
On October 28 he agreed to a partially face-saving compromise, by which he would pull the missiles out of Cuba.
The United States in return agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island.
The American government also quietly signaled that it would remove from Turkey some of its own missiles targeted on the Soviet Union.
Fallout from the Cuban missile crisis was considerable.
A disgraced Khrushchev was ultimately hounded out of the Kremlin and became an unperC HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 son.
Hard-liners in Moscow, vowing never again to be humiliated in a nuclear face-off, launched an enormous program of military expansion.
The Soviet buildup reached a crescendo in the next decade, stimulating, in turn, a vast American effort to catch up with the Russians.
The Democrats did better than expected in the midterm elections of November 1962allegedly because the Republicans were Cubanized.
Kennedy, apparently sobered by the appalling risks he had just run, pushed harder for a nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union.
After prolonged negotiations in Moscow, a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the atmosphere was signed in late 1963.
Another barometer indicating a thaw in the Cold War was the installation (August 1963) of a Moscow-Washington hot line, permitting immediate teletype communication in case of crisis.
Most significant was Kennedys speech at American University, Washington, D.C., in June 1963.
The president urged Americans to abandon a view of  the Soviet Union as a Devil-ridden land filled with fanatics and instead to deal with the world as it is, not as it might have been had the history of the last eighteen years been different.
Kennedy thus tried to lay the foundations for a realistic policy of peaceful coexistence with the Soviet Union.
Here were the modest origins of the policy that later came to be known as dtente (French for relaxation).
Kennedy had campaigned with a strong appeal to black voters, but he proceeded gingerly to redeem his promises.
Although he had pledged to eliminate racial discrimination in housing with a stroke of the pen, it took him nearly two years to find the right pen.
Civil rights groups meanwhile sent thousands of pens to the White House in an Ink for Jack protest against the presidents slowness.
Political concerns stayed the presidents hand on civil rights.
Elected by a wafer-thin margin, and with shaky control over Congress, Kennedy needed the support of southern legislators to pass his economic and social legislation, especially his medical and educational bills.
He believed, perhaps justifiably, that those measures would eventually benefit black Americans at least as much as specific legislation on civil rights.
Bold moves for racial justice would have to wait.
But events soon scrambled these careful calculations.
Following the wave of sit-ins that surged across the South in 1960, groups of Freedom Riders fanned out to end segregation in facilities serving interstate bus passengers.
A white mob torched a Freedom Ride bus near Anniston, Alabama, in May 1961, and Attorney General Robert Kennedys  personal representative was beaten unconscious in another antiFreedom Ride riot in Montgomery.
When southern officials proved unwilling or unable to stem the violence, Washington dispatched federal marshals to protect the Freedom Riders.
Reluctantly but fatefully, the Kennedy administration had now joined hands with the civil rights movement.
Because of that partnership, the Kennedys proved ultra-wary about the political associates of Martin Luther King, Jr.
Fearful of embarrassing revelations that some of Kings advisers had communist affiliations, Robert Kennedy ordered FBI director J. Edgar Hoover to wiretap Kings phone in late 1963.
But for the most part, the relationship between King and the Kennedys was a fruitful one.
Encouraged by Robert Kennedy, and with financial backing from Kennedy-prodded private foundations, SNCC and other civil rights groups inaugurated a Voter Education Project to register the Souths historically disfranchised blacks.
Because of his support for civil rights, President Kennedy told a group of black leaders in 1963, I may lose the next election .
I dont care.
Integrating southern universities threatened to provoke wholesale slaughter.
Some desegregated painlessly, but the University of Mississippi (Ole Miss) became a volcano.
A twenty-nine-year-old air force veteran, James Meredith, encountered violent opposition when he attempted to register in October 1962.
In the end President Kennedy was forced to send in 400 federal marshals and 3,000 troops to enroll Meredith in his first classin colonial American history.
He ultimately graduated, with a sheepskin that cost the lives of 2 men, scores of injuries, and some 4 million taxpayer dollars.
In the spring of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr., launched a campaign against discrimination in Birmingham, Alabama, the most segregated big city in America.
Although blacks constituted nearly half of the citys population, they made up fewer than 15 percent of the citys voters.
Previous attempts to crack the citys rigid racial barriers had produced more than fifty cross burnings and eighteen bomb C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 If an American, because his skin is dark, cannot eat lunch in a restaurant open to the public; if he cannot send his children to the best public school available; if he cannot vote for the public officials who represent him; if, in short, he cannot enjoy the full and free life which all of us want, then who among us would be content to have the color of his skin changed and stand in his place?
The day after the March on Washington of August 28, 1963 (see p.
926), newspapers all over the country carried reports of this historic assembly of more than 200,000 people to demand civil rights and equal job opportunities for AfricanAmericans.
Although the basic outlines of the story were the same in most papers, ancillary articles, photographs, and editorials revealed deep-seated biases in coverage.
Shown here are continuations from the front page stories in  While the  tial for violence and the precautions taken by police.
The article read: There was such a force of uniformed officers on hand to cope with any possible trouble that one senator was prompted to comment: It almost looks like we had a military coup dtat during the night.
In addition to stressing the marchs potential for disruption, the  advertisement right below the March on Washington story for a National Ku Klux Klan Rally two days hence, featuring prominent speakers and a cross burning.
This comparison of newspaper coverage of a controversial event serves as a reminder that press reporting must always be scrutinized for biases when it is used as historical evidence.
What other differences in coverage separated these two newspapers?
What factors contribute to press biases?
attacks since 1957.
Some of the people sitting here will not come back alive from this campaign, King advised his organizers.
Events soon confirmed this grim prediction of violence.
Watching developments on television screens, a horrified world saw peaceful civil rights marchers repeatedly repelled by police with attack dogs and electric cattle prods.
Most fearsome of all were the high-pressure water hoses directed at the civil rights demonstrators.
They delivered water with enough force to knock bricks loose from buildings or strip bark from trees at a distance of one hundred feet.
Water from the hoses bowled little children down the street like tumbleweed.
Jolted by these vicious confrontations, President Kennedy delivered a memorable televised speech to the nation on June 11, 1963.
In contrast to Eisenhowers cool aloofness from the racial question, Kennedy called the situation a moral issue and committed his personal and presidential prestige to finding a solution.
Drawing on the same spiritual traditions as Martin Luther King, Jr., Kennedy declared that the principle at stake is as old as the Scriptures and is as clear as the American Constitution.
He called for new civil rights legislation to protect black citizens.
In August King led 200,000 black and white demonstrators on a peaceful March on Washington in support of the proposed legislation.
In an electrifying  speech from the Lincoln Memorial, King declared, I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in  a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character.
Still the violence continued.
On the very night of Kennedys stirring television address, a white gunman shot down Medgar Evers, a black Mississippi civil rights worker.
In September 1963 an explosion blasted a Baptist church in Birmingham, killing four black girls who had just finished their lesson called The Love That Forgives.
By the time of Kennedys death, his civil rights bill was making little headway, and frustrated blacks were growing increasingly impatient.
Violence haunted America in the mid-1960s, and it stalked onto center stage on November 22, 1963.
While riding in an open limousine in downtown Dallas, Texas, President Kennedy was shot in the brain by a concealed rifleman and died within seconds.
As a stunned nation grieved, the tragedy grew still more unbelievable.
The alleged assassin, a furtive figure named Lee Harvey Oswald, was himself shot to death in front of television cameras by a self-appointed avenger, Jack Ruby.
So bizarre were the events surrounding the two murders that even C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 an elaborate official investigation conducted by Chief Justice Warren could not quiet all doubts and theories about what had really happened.
Vice President Johnson was promptly sworn in as president on a waiting airplane and flown back to Washington with Kennedys body.
Although he mistrusted the Harvards, Johnson retained most of the bright Kennedy team.
The new president managed a dignified and efficient transition, pledging continuity with his slain predecessors policies.
For several days the nation was steeped in sorrow.
Not until then did many Americans realize how fully their young, vibrant president and his captivating wife had cast a spell over them.
Chopped down in his prime after only slightly more than a thousand days in the White House, Kennedy was acclaimed more for the ideals he had enunciated and the spirit he had kindled than for the concrete goals he had achieved.
He had laid one myth to rest foreverthat a Catholic could not be trusted with the presidency of the United States.
In later years revelations about Kennedys womanizing and allegations about his involvement with organized crime figures tarnished his reputation.
But despite those accusations, his vigor, charisma, and idealism made him an inspirational figure for the generation of Americans who came of age in the 1960sincluding Bill Clinton, who as a boy had briefly met President Kennedy and would himself be elected president in 1992.
The torch passed to craggy-faced Lyndon Baines Johnson, a Texan who towered six feet three inches.
The new president hailed from the populist hill country of west Texas, whose people had first sent him to Washington as a twenty-nine-year-old congressman in 1937.
Franklin D. Roosevelt was his political Daddy, Johnson claimed, and he had supported New Deal measures down the line.
But when LBJ lost a Senate race in 1941, he learned the sobering lesson that liberal political beliefs did not necessarily win elections in Texas.
He trimmed his sails to the right and squeezed himself into a Senate seat in 1948 with a questionable eighty-seven-vote marginhence the ironic nickname Landslide Lyndon.
Entrenched in the Senate, Johnson developed into a masterful wheeler-dealer.
He became the Democratic majority leader in 1954, wielding power second only to that of Eisenhower in the White House.
He could move mountains or checkmate opponents as the occasion demanded, using what came to be known as the Johnson treatmenta flashing display of backslapping, flesh-pressing, and arm-twisting that overbore friend and foe alike.
His ego and vanity were legendary.
On a visit to the Pope, Johnson was presented with a precious fourteenth-century painting from the Vatican art collection; in return, LBJ gave the Pope a bustof LBJ!
As president, Johnson quickly shed the conservative coloration of his Senate years to reveal the latent liberal underneath.
No memorial oration or eulogy, Johnson declared to Congress, could more eloquently honor President Kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the Civil Rights Bill for which he fought so long.
After a lengthy conservative filibuster, Congress at last passed the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The act banned racial discrimination in most private facilities open to the public, including theaters, hospitals, and restaurants.
It strengthened the federal governments power to end segregation in schools and other public places.
It created the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to eliminate discrimination in hiring.
When conservatives tried to derail the legislation by adding a prohibition on  the tactic backfired.
The bills opponents cynically calculated that liberals would not be able to support a bill that threatened to wipe out laws that singled out women for special protection because of their sex.
But the acts Title VII passed with the sexual clause intact.
It soon proved to be a powerful instrument of federally enforced gender equality, as well as racial equality.
Johnson struck another blow for women and minorities in 1965 when he issued an executive order requiring all federal contractors to take affirmative action against discrimination.
Johnson also rammed Kennedys stalled tax bill through Congress and added proposals of his own for a billion-dollar War on Poverty.
Johnson voiced special concern for Appalachia, where the sickness of the soft-coal industry had left tens of thousands of mountain folk on the human slag heap.
Johnson dubbed his domestic program the Great Societya sweeping set of New Dealish economic and welfare measures aimed at transforming the American way of life.
Public support for LBJs antipoverty war was aroused by Michael Harringtons  that in affluent America 20 percent of the populationand over 40 percent of the black population suffered in poverty.
Johnsons nomination by the Democrats in 1964 was a foregone conclusion; he was chosen by acclamation in Atlantic City as his birthday present.
Thanks to the tall Texan, the Democrats stood foursquare on their most liberal platform since Trumans Fair Deal days.
The Republicans, convening in San Franciscos Cow Palace, nominated box-jawed Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, a bronzed and bespectacled champion of rock-ribbed conservatism.
The C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 Johnson  Democratic Goldwater  Republican WASH.
9 ORE.
6 WYO.
UTAH NEV.
CALIF.
40 ALASKA HAWAII TEXAS 25 LA.
10 MISS.
7 ALA.
10 GA.
12 S.C.
8 FLA.
14 ARK.
6 TENN.
11 N.C.
13 IDAHO MONT.
4 4 N.D.
4 MINN.
10 WIS.
12 MICH.
21 N.Y.
43 VT.
3 N.H.
4 ME.
4 3 3 4 ARIZ.
5 N.M.
4 COLO.
6 OKLA.
8 KAN.
7 NEB.
5 S.D.
4 MO.
12 IOWA  9 I LL.
26 IND.
13 OHIO 26 W.VA.
7 MD.
10 WASH., D.C.
3  PA.
29 N.J.
17 CONN.
8 R.I.
4 MASS.
14 VA.
12 KY.
9 3 4 DEL.
3 Presidential Election of 1964 States are distorted according to the number of electoral votes indicated on each state.
In New Orleans, toward the end of the campaign, a gutsy Johnson displayed his commitment to civil rights when he told a story about an old senator who once said of his Deep South constituents, I would like to go back down there and make them just one more Democratic speech.
The poor old State, they havent heard a Democratic speech in 30 years.
All they hear at election time is Negro, Negro, Negro!
Johnsons open voicing of sentiments like this contributed heavily to his losses in the traditionally Democratic solid South.
American stage was thus set for a historic clash of political principles.
Goldwaters forces had galloped out of the Southwest to ride roughshod over the moderate Republican eastern establishment.
Insisting that the GOP offer a choice not an echo, Goldwater attacked  the federal income tax, the Social Security system, the Tennessee Valley Authority, civil rights legislation, the nuclear test-ban treaty, and, most loudly, the Great Society.
His fiercely dedicated followers proclaimed, In Your Heart You Know Hes Right, which prompted the Democratic response, In Your Guts You Know Hes Nuts.
Goldwater warmed right-wing hearts when he announced that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.
And .
moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.
Democrats gleefully exploited the image of Goldwater as a trigger-happy cowboy who would Barry us in the debris of World War III.
Johnson cultivated the contrasting image of a resolute statesman by seizing upon the Tonkin Gulf episode early in August 1964.
Unbeknownst to the American public or Congress, U.S.
Navy ships had been cooperating with South Vietnamese gunboats in provocative raids along the coast of North Vietnam.
Two of these American destroyers were allegedly fired upon by the North Vietnamese on August 2 and 4, although exactly what happened still remains unclear.
Later investigations strongly suggested that the North Vietnamese fired in self-defense on August 2 and that the attack of August 4 never happened.
Johnson later reportedly wisecracked, For all I know, the Navy was shooting at whales out there.
Johnson nevertheless promptly called the attack unprovoked and moved swiftly to make political hay out of this episode.
He ordered a limited retaliatory air raid against the North Vietnamese bases, loudly proclaiming that he sought no wider warthus implying that the truculent Goldwater did.
Johnson also used the incident to spur congressional passage of the all-purpose Tonkin Gulf Resolution.
With only two dissenting votes in both houses, the lawmakers virtually abdicated their war-declaring powers and handed the president a blank check to use further force in Southeast Asia.
The Tonkin Gulf Resolution, Johnson boasted, was like grandmas nightshirtit covered everything.
The towering Texan rode to a spectacular victory in November 1964.
The voters were herded into Johnsons column by fondness for the Kennedy legacy, faith in Great Society promises, and fear of Goldwater.
A stampede of 43,129,566 Johnson votes trampled the Republican ticket with its 27,178,188 supporters.
The tally in the Electoral College was 486 to 52.
Goldwater carried only his native Arizona and five other statesall of them, significantly, in the racially restless South.
This cracking of the once solidly Democratic South afforded the Republicans about the only faint light in an otherwise bleak political picture.
Johnsons record-breaking 61 percent of the popular vote swept lopsided Democratic majorities into both houses of Congress.
Johnsons huge victory temporarily smashed the conservative congressional coalition of southern Democrats and northern Republicans.
A wide-open legislative road stretched before the Great Society programs, as the president skillfully ringmastered his two-to-one Democratic majorities.
Congress poured out a flood of legislation, comparable only to the output of the New Dealers in the Hundred Days Congress of 1933.
Johnson, confident that a growing economy gave him ample fiscal and political room for maneuver, delivered at last on longdeferred Democratic promises of social reform.
Escalating the War on Poverty, Congress doubled the appropriation of the Office of Economic Opportunity to $2 billion and granted more than $1 billion to redevelop the gutted hills and hollows of Appalachia.
A tireless Johnson also prodded the Congress into creating two new cabinet offices: the Department of Transportation and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), to which he named the first black cabinet secretary in the nations history, respected economist Robert C. Weaver.
Other noteworthy laws established the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities, designed to lift the level of American cultural life.
Even more impressive were the Big Four legislative achievements that crowned LBJs Great Society program: aid to education, medical care for the elderly and indigent, immigration reform, and a new voting rights bill.
Johnson neatly avoided the thorny question of separation of church and state by channeling educational aid to students, not schools, thus allowing funds to flow to hard-pressed parochial institutions.
(Catholic John F. Kennedy had not dared to touch this prickly issue.
) With a keen eye for the dramatic, LBJ signed the education bill in the humble oneroom Texas schoolhouse he had attended as a boy.
Medicare for the elderly, accompanied by Medicaid for the poor, became a reality in 1965.
Although they were bitter pills for the American Medical Association to swallow, the new programs were welcomed by millions of older Americans who had no health insurance (half of those over the age of sixty-five in 1965) and by the poor who could not afford proper medical treatment.
Like the New Deals Social Security program, Medicare and Medicaid created entitlements.
That is, they conferred rights on certain categories of Americans virtually in perpetuity, without the need for repeated congressional approval.
These programs were part of a spreading rights revolution that materially improved the lives of millions of Americansbut also eventually undermined the federal governments financial health.
Immigration reform was the third of Johnsons Big Four feats.
The Immigration and Nationality  Act of 1965 abolished at last the national-origins quota system that had been in place since 1921 (see  p.
731).
The act also doubled (to 290,000) the number of immigrants allowed to enter annually, while for the first time setting limits on immigrants from the Western Hemisphere (120,000).
The new law further provided for the admission of close relatives of United States citizens, outside those numerical limits.
To the surprise of many of the acts architects, more than 100,000 persons per year took advantage of its family unification provisions in the decades after 1965, and the immigrant stream swelled beyond expectations.
Even more surprising to the acts sponsors, the sources of immigration soon shifted heavily from Europe to Latin America and Asia, dramatically changing the racial and ethnic composition of the American population.
Great Society programs came in for rancorous political attack in later years.
Conservatives charged that poverty could not be papered over with greenbacks and that the billions spent for social engineering had simply been flushed down the waste pipe.
Yet the poverty rate declined measurably in the ensuing decade.
Medicare made especially dramatic reductions in the incidence of poverty among Americas elderly.
Other antipoverty programs, among them Project Head Start, sharply improved the educational performance of underprivileged youth.
Infant mortality rates also fell in minority communities as general health conditions improved.
Lyndon Johnson was not fully victorious in the war against poverty, and he doubtless fought some costly and futile campaigns, but he did win several noteworthy battles.
C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 With the last of his Big Four reforms, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Johnson made heartening headway against one of the most persistent American evils, racial discrimination.
In Johnsons native South, the walls of segregation were crumbling,  but not fast enough for long-suffering AfricanAmericans.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 gave the  federal government more muscle to enforce schooldesegregation orders and to prohibit racial discrimination in all kinds of public accommodations and employment.
But the problem of voting rights remained.
In Mississippi, which had the largest black minority of any state, only about 5 percent of eligible blacks were registered to vote.
The lopsided pattern was similar throughout the South.
Ballotdenying devices like the poll tax, literacy tests, and barefaced intimidation still barred black people from the political process.
Mississippi law required the names of prospective black registrants to be published for two weeks in local newspapersa device that virtually guaranteed economic reprisals, or worse.
Beginning in 1964, opening up the polling booths became the chief goal of the black movement in the South.
The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratified in January 1964, abolished the poll tax in federal elections.
(See the Appendix.
) Blacks joined hands with white civil rights workersmany of them student volunteers from the Northin a massive voter-registration drive in Mississippi during the Freedom Summer of 1964.
Singing We Shall Overcome, they zealously set out to soothe generations of white anxieties and black fears.
But events soon blighted bright hopes.
In late June 1964, one black and two white civil rights workers disappeared in Mississippi.
Their badly beaten bodies were later found buried beneath an earthen dam.
FBI investigators eventually arrested twenty-one white Mississippians, including the local sheriff, in connection with the killings.
But white juries refused to convict whites for these murders.
In August an integrated Mississippi Freedom Democratic party delegation was denied its seat at the national Democratic convention.
Only a handful of black Mississippians had succeeded in registering to vote.
Early in 1965 Martin Luther King, Jr., resumed the voter-registration campaign in Selma, Alabama, where blacks made up 50 percent of the population but only 1 percent of the voters.
State troopers with tear gas and whips assaulted Kings demonstrators as they marched peacefully to the state capital at Montgomery.
A Boston Unitarian minister was killed, and a few days later a white Detroit woman was shotgunned to death by Klansmen on the highway near Selma.
As the nation recoiled in horror before these violent scenes, President Johnson, speaking in soft southern accents, delivered a compelling address on television.
What happened in Selma, he insisted, concerned all Americans, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice.
Then, in a stirring adaptation of the anthem of the civil rights movement, the president concluded, And we shall overcome.
Following words with deeds, Johnson speedily shepherded through Congress the landmark Voting Rights Act of 1965, signed into law on August 6.
It outlawed literacy tests and sent federal voter registrars into several southern states.
The passage of the Voting Rights Act, exactly one hundred years after the conclusion of the Civil War, climaxed a century of awful abuse and robust resurgence for African-Americans in the South.
Give us the ballot, said Martin Luther King, Jr., and the South will never be the same again.
He was right.
The act did not end discrimination and 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 99 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Millions/ Percent Number in poverty Poverty rate ( %) Poverty in the United States, 19601999 The poverty rate for 1999 (11.8%) was the lowest since 1979.
These figures refer to the number of people who live in families whose total income is lower than a set poverty threshold, which is tied to the Consumer Price Index, so it varies with inflation.
The poverty rate means the percentage of all Americans living below that threshold.
(Source: U.S.
Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey.
) C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 oppression overnight, but it placed an awesome lever for change in blacks hands.
Black southerners now had power and began to wield it without fear of reprisals.
White southerners began to court black votes and business as never before.
In the following decade, for the first time since emancipation, African-Americans began to migrate  The Voting Rights Act of 1965 marked the end of an era in the history of the civil rights movementthe era of nonviolent demonstrations, focused on the South, led by peaceful moderates like Martin Luther King, Jr., and aimed at integrating blacks into American society.
As if to symbolize the turn of events, just five days after President Johnson signed the landmark voting law, a bloody riot erupted in Watts, a black ghetto in Los Angeles.
Blacks enraged by police brutality burned and looted their own neighborhoods for nearly a week.
When the smoke finally cleared over the Los Angeles basin, thirty-one blacks and three whites lay dead, more than a thousand people had been injured, and hundreds of buildings stood charred and gutted.
The Watts explosion heralded a new phase of the black struggleincreasingly marked by militant confrontation, focusing  on northern and western cities, led by radical and sometimes violent spokespersons, and often aiming not at interracial cooperation but at black  separatism.
The pious Christian moderation of Martin Luther King, Jr., came under heavy fire from this second wave of younger black leaders, who privately mocked the dignified Dr.
King as de Lawd.
Deepening division among black leaders was highlighted by the career of Malcolm X. Born Malcolm Little, he was at first inspired by the militant black nationalists in the Nation of Islam.
Like the Nations founder, Elijah Muhammed (born Elijah Poole), Malcolm changed his surname to advertise his lost African identity in white America.
A brilliant and charismatic preacher, Malcolm X trumpeted black separatism and inveighed against the blue-eyed white devils.
Eventually Malcolm distanced himself from Elijah Muhammeds separatist preachings  and moved toward mainstream Islam.
(By the  1990s Islam was among Americas fastest-growing religions and counted some 2 million AfricanAmerican convertsor reverts as Muslims described itin its ranks.
) Malcolm changed his  name yet again, to El Haj Malik El-Shabazz, and began to preach a more conciliatory message.
But in early 1965, he was cut down by rival Nation of Islam gunmen while speaking to a large crowd in New York City.
With frightening frequency, violence or the threat of violence raised its head in the black community.
The Black Panther party openly brandished weapons in the streets of Oakland, California.
The following year Trinidad-born Stokely Carmichael, a leader of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC, pronounced snick), urged the abandonment of peaceful demonstrations and instead promoted Black Power.
The very phrase Black Power unsettled many whites, and their fears increased when Carmichael was quoted as gloating that Black Power will smash everything Western civilization has created.
Some advocates of Black Power insisted that they simply intended the slogan to describe a broad-front effort to exercise the political and economic rights gained by the civil rights movement and to speed the integration of American society.
But other AfricanAmericans, recollecting previous black nationalist movements like that of Marcus Garvey earlier in the century (see p.
748), breathed a vibrant separatist meaning into the concept of Black Power.
They emphasized African-American distinctiveness, promoted Afro hairstyles and dress, shed their white names for new African identities, and demanded black studies programs in schools and universities.
Ironically, just as the civil rights movement had achieved its greatest legal and political triumphs, more city-shaking riots erupted in the black ghettoes of several American cities.
A bloody outburst in Newark, New Jersey, in the summer of 1967, took twenty-five lives.
Federal troops restored order in Detroit, Michigan, after forty-three people died in the streets.
As in Los Angeles, black rioters torched their own neighborhoods, attacking police officers and even firefighters, who had to battle both flames and mobs howling, Burn, baby, burn.
These riotous outbursts angered many white Americans, who threatened to retaliate with their own backlash against ghetto arsonists and killers.
Inner-city anarchy baffled many northerners, who had considered racial problems a purely southern question.
But black concerns had moved northas had nearly half the nations black people.
In the North the Black Power movement now focused less on civil rights and more on economic demands.
In the process of gaining our rightful place we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds.
Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred.
We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence.
Again and again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.
Revolution is bloody, revolution is hostile, revolution knows no compromise, revolution overturns and destroys everything that gets in its way.
And you, sitting around here like a knot on the wall, saying, Im going to love these folks no matter how much they hate me.
Whoever heard of a revolution where they lock arms, .
singing We shall overcome?
You dont do that in a revolution.
You dont do any singing, youre too busy swinging.
Black unemployment, for example, was nearly double that for whites.
These oppressive new problems seemed even less likely to be solved peaceably than the struggle for voting rights in the South.
Despair deepened when the magnetic and moderate voice of Martin Luther King, Jr., was forever silenced by a snipers bullet in Memphis, Tennessee, on April 4, 1968.
A martyr for justice, he had bled and died against the peculiarly American thorn of race.
The killing of King cruelly robbed the American people of one of the most inspirational leaders in their historyat a time when they could least afford to lose him.
This outrage triggered a nationwide orgy of ghetto-gutting and violence that cost over forty lives.
Rioters noisily made news, but thousands of other blacks quietly made history.
Their voter registration in the South shot upward, and by the late 1960s several hundred blacks held elected office in the Old South.
Cleveland, Ohio, and Gary, Indiana, elected black mayors.
By 1972 nearly half of southern black children sat in integrated classrooms.
Actually, more schools in the South were integrated than in the North.
About a third of black families had risen economically into the ranks of the middle classthough an equal proportion remained below the poverty line.
King left a shining legacy of racial progress, but he was cut down when the job was far from completed.
Violence at home eclipsed Johnsons legislative triumphs, while foreign flare-ups threatened his political life.
Discontented Dominicans rose in revolt against their military government in April 1965.
Johnson speedily announced that the Dominican Republic was the target of a Castrolike coup by Communist conspirators, and he dispatched American troops, ultimately some 25,000, to restore order.
But the evidence of a communist takeover was fragmentary at best.
Johnson was widely condemned, at home and in Latin America, for his  temporary reversion to the officially abandoned gunboat diplomacy.
Critics charged that the twofisted Texan was far too eager to back right-wing regimes with rifle-toting troops.
At about the same time, Johnson was floundering deeper into the monsoon mud of Vietnam.
Viet Cong guerrillas attacked an American air base at Pleiku, South Vietnam, in February 1965.
The president immediately ordered retaliatory bombing raids against military installations in North Vietnam and for the first time ordered attacking U.S.
troops to land.
By the middle of March 1965, the Americans had Operation Rolling Thunder in full swingregular full-scale bombing attacks against North VietC HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 nam.
Before 1965 ended, some 184,000 American troops were involved, most of them slogging through the jungles and rice paddies of South Vietnam searching for guerrillas clad in black pajamas.
Johnson had now taken the first fateful steps down a slippery path.
He and his advisers believed that a fine-tuned, step-by-step escalation of American force would drive the enemy to defeat with a minimum loss of life on both sides.
But the president reckoned without due knowledge of the toughness, resiliency, and dedication of the Viet Cong guerrillas in South Vietnam and their North Vietnamese allies.
Aerial bombardment actually strengthened the communists will to resist.
The enemy matched every increase in American firepower with more men and more wiliness in the art of guerrilla warfare.
The South Vietnamese themselves were meanwhile becoming spectators in their own war, as the fighting became increasingly Americanized.
Corrupt and collapsible governments succeeded each other in Saigon with bewildering rapidity.
Yet American officials continued to talk of defending a faithful democratic ally.
Washington spokespeople also defended Americas action as a test of Uncle Sams commitment and of the reliability of his numerous treaty pledges to resist communist encroachment.
If the United States were to cut and run from Vietnam, claimed prowar hawks, other nations would doubt Americas word and crumble under communist pressure (the so-called domino theory), which would ostensibly drive Americas first line of defense back to Waikiki Beach, in Hawaii, or even to the coast of California.
Persuaded by such panicky thinking, Johnson steadily raised the military stakes in Vietnam.
By 1968 he had poured more than half a million troops into Southeast Asia, and the annual bill for the war was exceeding $30 billion.
Yet the end was nowhere in sight.
America could not defeat the enemy in Vietnam, but it seemed to be defeating itself.
World opinion grew increasingly hostile; the blasting of an underdeveloped country by a mighty superpower struck many critics as obscene.
Several nations expelled American Peace Corps volunteers.
Haughty Charles de Gaulle, ever suspicious of American intentions, ordered NATO off French soil in 1966.
Overcommitment in Southeast Asia also tied Americas hands elsewhere.
Capitalizing on American distractions in Vietnam, the Soviet Union expanded its influence in the Mediterranean area, especially in Egypt.
Tiny Israel stunned the Soviet-backed Egyptians in a devastating Six-Day War in June 1967.
When the smoke had cleared, Israel occupied new territories in the Sinai Peninsula, the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank of the Jordan River, including Jerusalem (see the map on p.
983).
Although the Israelis eventually withdrew from the Sinai, they refused to relinquish the other areas and even introduced Jewish settlers into the heavily Arab district of the West Bank.
The Arab Palestinians already living in the West Bank and their Arab allies elsewhere complained loudly about these Israeli policies, but to no avail.
The Middle East was becoming an ever more dangerously packed powder keg that the war-plagued United States was powerless to defuse.
Domestic discontent festered as the Vietnamese entanglement dragged on.
Antiwar demonstrations had begun on a small scale with campus teach-ins in 1965, and gradually these protests mounted to tidal-wave proportions.
As the long arm of the military draft dragged more and more young men off to the Southeast Asian slaughterpen, resistance stiffened.
Thousands of draft registrants fled to Canada; others publicly burned their draft cards.
Hundreds of thousands of marchers filled the streets of New York, San Francisco, and other cities, chanting, Hell no, we wont go and Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you kill today?
Countless  citizens felt the pinch of war-spawned inflation.
Many Americans also felt pangs of conscience at the spectacle of their countrymen burning peasant huts and blistering civilians with ghastly napalm.
Opposition in Congress to the Vietnam involvement centered in the influential Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, headed by a former Rhodes scholar, Senator William Fulbright of Arkansas.
A constant thorn in the side of the president, he staged a series of widely viewed televised hearings in 1966 and 1967, during which prominent personages aired their views, largely antiwar.
Gradually the public came to feel that it had been deceived about the causes and winnability of the war.
A yawning credibility gap opened between the government and the people.
New flocks of antiwar doves were hatching daily.
Even within the administration, doubts were deepening about the wisdom of the war in Vietnam.
When Defense Secretary McNamara expressed increasing discomfiture at the course of events, he was quietly eased out of the cabinet.
(Years later McNamara wrote that we were wrong, terribly wrong, about Vietnam.
) President Johnson did announce bombing halts in early 1966 and early 1967, supposedly to lure the enemy to the peace table.
But Washington did not pursue its peace offensive with much energy, and the other side did not respond with any encouragement.
Both sides used the bombing pauses to funnel more troops into South Vietnam.
By early 1968 the brutal and futile struggle had become the longest and most unpopular foreign war in the nations history.
The government had failed utterly to explain to the people what was supposed to be at stake in Vietnam.
Many critics wondered if any objective could be worth the vast price, in blood and treasure, that America was paying.
Casualties, killed and wounded, already exceeded 100,000.
More bombs had been dropped on Vietnam than on all enemy territory in World War II.
The war was also ripping apart the fabric of American society and even threatening to shred the Constitution.
In 1967 President Johnson ordered the CIA, in clear violation of its charter as a  ligence agency, to spy on domestic antiwar activists.
He also encouraged the FBI to turn its counterintelligence program, code-named Cointelpro, against the peace movement.
Cointelpro had been launched by J. Edgar Hoover in the 1950s to infiltrate communist organizations.
Now under presidential directive, it sabotaged peace groups by conducting black bag break-ins.
Cointelpro also subverted leading doves with false accusations C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 that they were communist sympathizers.
These clandestine tactics made the FBI look like a totalitarian states secret police rather than a guardian of American democracy.
As the war dragged on, evidence mounted that America had been entrapped in an Asian civil war, fighting against highly motivated rebels who were striving to overthrow an oppressive regime.
Yet Johnson clung to his basic strategy of ratcheting up the pressure bit by bit.
He stubbornly assured doubting Americans that he could see the light at the end of the tunnel.
But to growing numbers of Americans, it seemed that Johnson was bent on saving Vietnam by destroying it.
Hawkish illusions that the struggle was about to be won were shattered by a blistering communist offensive launched in late January 1968, during Tet, the Vietnamese New Year.
At a time when the Viet Cong were supposedly licking their wounds, they suddenly and simultaneously mounted savage attacks on twenty-seven key South Vietnamese cities, including the capital, Saigon.
Although eventually beaten off with heavy losses, they demonstrated anew that victory could not be gained by Johnsons strategy of gradual escalation.
The Tet offensive ended in a military defeat but a political victory for the Viet Cong.
With an increasingly insistent voice, American public opinion demanded a speedy end to the war.
Opposition grew so vehement that President Johnson could feel the very foundations of  government shaking under his feet.
He was also suffering through hells of personal agony over American casualties.
He wept as he signed letters of condolence, and slipped off at night to pray with monks at a small Catholic church in Washington.
American military leaders responded to the Tet attacks with a request for 200,000 more troops.
The largest single increment yet, this addition would have swollen American troop strength in Vietnam to about the three-quarter-million mark.
The size of the request staggered many policymakers.
Former secretary of state Dean Acheson reportedly advised the president that the Joint Chiefs of Staff dont know what theyre talking about.
Johnson himself now began to doubt seriously the wisdom of continuing on his raise-the-stakes course.
The president meanwhile was being sharply challenged from within his own party.
Eugene McCarthy, a little-known Democratic senator from Minnesota, had emerged as a contender for the 1968 Democratic presidential nomination.
The softspoken McCarthy, a sometime poet and devout Catholic, gathered a small army of antiwar college students as campaign workers.
Going clean for Gene, with shaven faces and shortened locks, these idealistic recruits of the Childrens Crusade invaded the key presidential primary state of New Hampshire to ring doorbells.
On March 12, 1968, their efforts gave McCarthy an incredible 42 percent of the Democratic votes and twenty of the twentyfour convention delegates.
President Johnson was on the same ballot, but only as a write-in candidate.
Four days later Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York, the murdered presidents younger brother and by now himself a dove on Vietnam, threw his hat into the ring.
The charismatic Kennedy, heir to  his fallen brothers mantle of leadership, stirred  a passionate response among workers, AfricanAmericans, Hispanics, and young people.
These startling events abroad and at home were not lost on LBJ.
The country might explode in greater violence if he met the request of the generals for more troops.
His own party was dangerously divided on the war issue.
He might not even be able to win renomination after his relatively poor showing in New Hampshire.
Yet he remained committed to victory in Vietnam, even if the light at the end of the tunnel was vanishing.
How could he salvage his blind-alley policy?
Johnsons answer came in a bombshell address on March 31, 1968.
He announced on nationwide television that he would finally apply the brakes to the escalating war.
He would freeze American troop levels and gradually shift more responsibility to the South Vietnamese themselves.
Aerial bombardment of the enemy would be drastically scaled down.
Then, in a dramatic plea to unify a dangerously divided nation, Johnson startled his vast audience by firmly declaring that he would not be a candidate for the presidency in 1968.
Johnsons abdication had the effect of preserving the military status quo.
He had held the hawks in check, while offering himself as a sacrifice to  the militant doves.
The United States could thus maintain the maximum  activity in Vietnam with one hand, while trying to negotiate a settlement with the other.
North Vietnam responded somewhat encouragingly three days later, when it expressed a willingness to talk about peace.
After a month of haggling over the site, the adversaries agreed to meet in Paris.
But progress was glacially slow, as prolonged bickering developed over the very shape of the conference table.
The summer of 1968 was one of the hottest political seasons in the nations history.
Johnsons heir apparent for the Democratic nomination was his liberal vice president, Hubert H. Humphrey, a former pharmacist, college professor, mayor, and U.S.
senator from Minnesota.
Loyally supporting LBJs Vietnam policies through thick and thin, he received the support of the party apparatus, dominated as it was by the White House.
Senators McCarthy and Kennedy meanwhile dueled in several state primaries, with Kennedys bandwagon gathering ever-increasing speed.
But on June 5, 1968, the night of an exciting victory in the California primary, Kennedy was shot to death by a young Arab immigrant resentful of the candidates pro-Israel views.
Surrounded by bitterness and frustration, the Democrats met in Chicago in late August 1968.
Angry antiwar zealots, deprived by an assassins bullet of their leading candidate, streamed menacingly into Chicago.
Mayor Daley responded by arranging for barbed-wire barricades around the convention hall (Fort Daley), as well as thousands of police and National Guard reinforcements.
Many demonstrators baited the officers in blue by calling them pigs.
Other militants, chanting Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh, shouted obscenities and hurled bags and cans of excrement at the police lines.
As people the world over watched on television, the exasperated peace officers broke into a police riot, clubbing and manhandling innocent and guilty alike.
Acrid tear gas fumes hung heavy over the city and even drifted up to candidate Humphreys hotel suite.
Hundreds of people were arrested and scores hospitalized, but there were no casualtiesexcept, as cynics said, the Democratic party and its candidate.
Humphrey steamrollered to the nomination on the first ballot.
The dovish McCarthyites failed even C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 to secure an antiwar platform plank.
Instead the Humphrey forces, echoing the president, hammered into place their own declaration that armed force would be relentlessly applied until the enemy showed more willingness to negotiate.
Scenting victory as the Democrats divided, the Republicans had jubilantly convened in plush Miami Beach, Florida, early in August 1968.
Richard M. Nixon, the former vice president whom John F. Kennedy had narrowly defeated eight years earlier, arose from his political grave to win the nomination.
As a hawk on Vietnam and a right-leaning middle-of-the-roader on domestic policy, Nixon pleased the Goldwater conservatives and was acceptable to party moderates.
He appealed to white southern voters and to the law and order element when he tapped as his vice-presidential running mate Marylands Governor Spiro T.  Agnew, noted for his tough stands against  dissidents and black militants.
The Republican  platform called for victory in Vietnam and a strong anticrime policy.
A spoiler third-party ticketthe American Independent partyadded color and confusion to the campaign.
It was headed by a scrappy expugilist, George C. Wallace, former governor of Alabama.
In 1963 he had stood in the doorway to prevent two black students from entering the University of Alabama.
Segregation now!
Segregation tomorrow!
Segregation forever!
he shouted.
Wallace jabbed repeatedly at pointy-headed bureaucrats, and he taunted hecklers as bums in need of a bath.
Speaking behind a bulletproof screen, he called for prodding the blacks into their place, with bayonets if necessary.
He and his running mate, former air force general Curtis LeMay, also proposed smashing the North Vietnamese to smithereens by bombing them back to the Stone Age.
Vietnam proved a less crucial issue than expected.
Between the positions of the Republicans and the Democrats, there was little choice.
Both candidates were committed to carrying on the war until the enemy settled for an honorable peace, which seemed to mean an American victory.
The millions of doves had no place to roost, and many refused to vote at all.
Humphrey, scorched by the LBJ brand, went down to defeat as a loyal prisoner of his chiefs policies, despite Johnsons last-minute effort to bail him out by announcing a  Nixon, who had lost a cliffhanger to Kennedy in 1960, won one in 1968.
He garnered 301 electoral votes, with 43.4 percent of the popular tally (31,785,480), as compared with 191 electoral votes and 42.7 percent of the popular votes (31,275,166) for Humphrey.
Nixon was the first president-elect since 1848 not to bring in on his coattails at least one house of Congress for his party in an initial presidential election.
He carried not a single major city, thus attesting to the continuing urban strength of the Democrats, who also won about 95 percent of the black vote.
Nixon had received no clear mandate to do anything.
He was a minority president who owed his election to divisions over the war and protest against the unfair draft, crime, and rioting.
Wallace did worse than expected.
Yet he won an impressive 9,906,473 popular votes and 46 electoral votes, all from five states of the Deep South, four of which the Republican Goldwater had carried in 1964.
Wallace remained a formidable force, for he had amassed the largest third-party popular vote in American history.
Wallace had also resoundingly demonstrated the continuing power of populist politics, which appealed to voters fears and resentments rather than to the better angels of their nature.
His candidacy foreshadowed a coarsening of American political life that would take deep root in the ensuing decades.
Talented but tragedy-struck Lyndon Johnson returned to his Texas ranch in January 1969 and died there four years later.
His party was defeated, and his me-too Hubert Humphrey was repudiated.
Yet Johnsons legislative leadership for a time had been remarkable.
No president since Lincoln had worked harder or done more for civil rights.
None had shown more compassion for the poor, blacks, and the ill educated.
LBJ seemed to suffer from an inferiority complex about his own arid cultural background, and he strove furiously to prove that he could be a great peoples president in the image of his idol, Franklin Roosevelt.
His legislative achievements in his first three years in office indeed invited comparison with those of the New Deal.
But by 1966 Johnson was already sinking into the Vietnam quicksands.
The Republicans had made gains in Congress, and a white backlash had begun to form against the black movement.
Great Society programs began to wither on the vine, as soaring war costs sucked tax dollars into the military machine.
Johnson had promised both guns and butter but could not keep that promise.
Evercreeping inflation blighted the prospects of prosperity, and the War on Poverty met resistance that was as stubborn as the Viet Cong and eventually went down to defeat.
Great want persisted alongside great wealth.
Johnson had crucified himself on the cross of Vietnam.
The Southeast Asian quagmire engulfed his noblest intentions.
Committed to some degree by his two predecessors, he had chosen to defend C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 NixonRepublican HumphreyDemocratic WallaceAmerican Independent WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
40 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
6 ARIZ.
5 ALASKA 3 S.D.
4 KANSAS 7 OKLA.
8 MICH.
20 N.Y.
43 N.D.
4 MINN.
10 IOWA 9 NEBR.
5 MO.
12 ARK.
6 LA.
10 TEXAS 25 N.M.
4 MISS.
7 ALA.
10 GA.
12 FLA.
14 TENN.
11 N.C.
13 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W. VA.
7 MD.
10 PA.
29 OHIO 26 IND.
13 ILL.
26 WISC.
12 KY.
9 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
14 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
17 DEL.
3 HAWAII 4 D.C.
3 1 Presidential Election of 1968  (with electoral vote by state) George Wallace won in five states, and he denied a clear majority to either of the two major-party candidates in twenty-five other states.
A shift of some fifty thousand votes might well have thrown the election into the House of Representatives, giving Wallace the strategic bargaining position he sought.
the American foothold and enlarge the conflict rather than be run out.
He was evidently persuaded by his brightest advisers, both civilian and military, that a cheap victory was possible.
It would be achieved by massive aerial bombing and large, though limited, troop commitments.
His decision not to escalate the fighting further offended the hawks, and his refusal to back off altogether antagonized the doves.
Like the Calvinists of colonial days, luckless Lyndon Johnson was damned if he did and damned if he did not.
The struggles of the 1960s against racism, poverty, and the war in Vietnam had momentous cultural consequences.
The decade came to be seen as a watershed dividing two distinct eras in terms of values, morals, and behavior.
Everywhere in 1960s America, a newly negative attitude toward all kinds of authority took hold.
Disillusioned by the discovery that American society was not free of racism, sexism, imperialism, and oppression, many young people lost their traditional moral rudders.
Neither families nor churches nor schools seemed to be able to define values and shape behavior with the certainty of shared purpose that many people believed had once existed.
The upheaval even churned the tradition-bound Roman Catholic church, among the worlds oldest and most conservative institutions.
Clerics abandoned their Roman collars and Latin lingo, folk songs replaced Gregorian chants, and meatless Fridays became ancient history.
No matter what the topic, conventional wisdom and inherited ideas came under fire.
Trust no one over thirty was a popular sneer of rebellious youth.
Skepticism about authority had deep historical roots in American culture, and it had even bloomed in the supposedly complacent and conformist 1950s.
Beat poets like Allen Ginsberg and iconoclastic novelists like Jack Kerouac had voiced dark disillusion with the materialistic pursuits and establishment arrogance of the Eisenhower era.
In movies like  tive young actor James Dean expressed the restless frustration of many young people.
The disaffection of the young reached crisis proportions in the tumultuous 1960s.
One of the first organized protests against established authority broke out at the University of California at Berkeley in 1964, in the so-called Free Speech Movement.
Leader Mario Savio, condemning the impersonal university machine more tied to corporate interests than humane values, urged his fellow students to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, .
and youve got to make it stop.
But in only a few years, the clean-cut Berkeley activists and their sober-minded sit-ins would seem downright quaint.
Fired by outrage against the war in Vietnam, some sons and daughters of the middle class became radical political rebels, while others turned to mind-bending drugs, tuned in to acid rock, and dropped out of straight society.
Others did their own thing in communes or alternative institutions.
Patriotism became a dirty word.
Beflowered women in trousers and long-haired men with earrings heralded the rise of a self-conscious counterculture blatantly opposed to traditional American ways.
The 1960s also witnessed a sexual revolution, though its novelty and scale are often exaggerated.
Without doubt, the introduction of the birth-control pill in 1960 made unwanted pregnancies much easier to avoid and sexual appetites easier to satisfy.
But as early as 1948, Indiana University sexologist Dr.
Alfred Kinsey had published sensational revelations about American sexual habits in  C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 They stretched in a line, from Gimbels to Times Square, thousands and thousands and thousands, chanting, waving, screaming the outrageous and the outraged, splendid in their flaming colors, splendid in their delirious up-front birthday celebration of liberation.
No one could quite believe it, eyes rolled back in heads, Sunday tourists traded incredulous looks, wondrous faces poked out of air-conditioned cars.
My God, are those really homosexuals?
Marching?
Up Sixth Avenue?
of interviews, Kinseys findings about the incidence of premarital sex and adultery caused a ruckus at the time and have been hotly debated ever since.
Most controversial was Kinseys estimate that 10 percent of American males were homosexuals.
Whatever the exact number, by the 1960s gay men and lesbians were increasingly emerging from the closet and demanding sexual tolerance.
The Mattachine Society, founded in Los Angeles in 1951, was a pioneering advocate for gay rights.
A brutal attack on gay men by off-duty police officers at New Yorks Stonewall Inn in 1969 powerfully energized gay and lesbian militancy.
Widening worries in the 1980s about sexually transmitted diseases like genital herpes and AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) finally slowed, but did not reverse, the sexual revolution.
Launched in youthful idealism, many of the  cultural revolutions of the 1960s sputtered out in violence and cynicism.
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), once at the forefront of the antipoverty and antiwar campaigns, had by decades end spawned an underground terrorist group called the Weathermen.
Peaceful civil rights demonstrations had given way to blockbusting urban riots.
What started as apparently innocent experiments with drugs like marijuana and LSD had fried many youthful brains and spawned a loathsome underworld of drug lords and addicted users.
Straight-laced guardians of respectability denounced the self-indulgent romanticism of the flower children as the beginning of the end of modern civilization.
Sympathetic observers hailed the greening of Americathe replacement of materialism and imperialism by a new consciousness of human values.
The upheavals of the 1960s could be largely attributed to three  population bulge, protest against racism and the Vietnam War, and the apparent permanence of prosperity.
As the decade flowed into the 1970s, the flower children grew older and had children of their own, the civil rights movement fell silent, the war ended, and economic stagnation blighted the bloom of prosperity.
Young people in the 1970s seemed more concerned with finding a job in the system than with tearing the system down.
But if the counterculture had not managed fully to replace older values, it had weakened their grip, perhaps permanently.
C HAPTER 39 The Stormy Sixties, 19601968 Berlin crisis and construction of the Berlin Wall Alliance for Progress Bay of Pigs Kennedy sends military advisers to South  Vietnam Pressure from Kennedy results in a rollback of  steel prices Trade Expansion Act Laos neutralized Cuban missile crisis Anti-Diem coup in South Vietnam Civil rights march in Washington, D.C.
Kennedy assassinated; Johnson assumes  presidency Twenty-fourth Amendment (abolishing poll  tax in federal elections) ratified Freedom Summer voter registration in the  South Tonkin Gulf Resolution Johnson defeats Goldwater for presidency War on Poverty begins Civil Rights Act Great Society legislation Voting Rights Act U.S.
troops occupy Dominican Republic Race riots in U.S.
cities Escalation of the Vietnam War Six-Day War between Israel and Egypt Tet offensive in Vietnam Martin Luther King, Jr., and Robert Kennedy  assassinated Nixon defeats Humphrey and Wallace for  presidency Astronauts land on moon he 1960s were convulsed by controversy, and they have remained controversial ever since.
Conflicts raged in that turbulent decade between social classes, races, sexes, and generations.
More than three decades later, the shock waves from the 1960s still reverberate through American society.
The Contract with America that swept conservative Republicans to power in 1994 amounted to nothing less than a wholesale repudiation of the government activism that marked the sixties decade and a resounding reaffirmation of the traditional values that sixties culture supposedly trashed.
Liberal Democrats, on the other hand, continue to press affirmative action for women and minorities, protection for the environment, an expanded welfare state, and sexual toleranceall legacies of the stormy sixties.
Four issues dominate historical discussion of the 1960s: the struggle for civil rights, the Great Societys War on Poverty, the Vietnam War and  the antiwar movement, and the emergence of the counterculture.
Although most scholars praise the civil rights achievements of the 1960s, they disagree over the civil rights movements turn away from nonviolence and its embrace of separatism and Black Power.
The Freedom Riders and Martin Luther King, Jr., find much more approval in most history books than do Malcolm X and the Black Panther party.
But some scholars, notably William L. Van Deburg in  effect of radical Black Power advocates like Stokely Carmichael actually enhanced the bargaining position of moderates like Dr.
King.
Deburg also suggests that the enthusiasm of Black Power advocates for African-American cultural uniqueness reshaped both black self-consciousness and the broader culture, as it provided a model for the feminist and multiculturalist movements of the 1970s and later.
Johnsons War on Poverty has found its liberal defenders in scholars like Allen Matusow ( ( strates, for example, that Medicare and Social Security reforms virtually eliminated poverty among Americas elderly.
But the Great Society has also provoked strong criticism from writers such as Charles Murray ( ( critics see the poverty issue, to use a phrase popular in the 1960s, the Great Society was part of the problem, not part of the solution.
In their view the War on Poverty did not simply fail to eradicate poverty among the so-called underclass; it actually deepened the dependency of the poor on the welfare state and even generated a multigenerational cycle of poverty.
In this argument Johnsons Great Society stands indicted of creating, in effect, a permanent welfare class.
For many young people of the 1960s, the antiwar movement protesting Americas policy in Vietnam provided their initiation into politics and their introduction to movement culture, with its sense of community and shared purpose.
But scholars disagree over the movements real effectiveness in checking the war.
Writers like John Lewis Gaddis ( eventual withdrawal from Vietnam essentially without reference to the protesters in the streets.
Others, like Todd Gitlin ( that finally pressed the war to a conclusion.
Debate over the counterculture not only pits liberals against conservatives but also pits liberals against radicals.
A liberal historian like William ONeill ( what he considers some of the worthy values pushed by student activists, such as racial justice, nonviolence, and the antiwar movement, but he also claims that much of the sixties youth culture degenerated into hedonism, arrogance, and social polarization.
In contrast, younger historians such as Michael Kazin and Maurice Isserman argue that cultural radicalism and political radicalism were two sides of the same coin.
Many young people in the sixties made little distinction between the personal and the political.
As Sara Evans demonstrates in  (1980), the personal  women.
She finds the roots of modern feminism in the sexism women activists encountered in the civil rights and antiwar movements.
While critics may argue over the good versus the bad sixties, there is no denying the degree to which that tumultuous time, for better or worse, shaped the world in which we now live.
For further reading, see page A26 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Stalemated Seventies  19681980 R ICHARD N IXON , 1973 A s the 1960s lurched to a close, the fantastic  quarter-century economic boom of the post World War II era also showed signs of petering out.
By increasing their productivity, American workers had doubled their average standard of living in the twenty-five years since the end of World War II.
Now, fatefully, productivity gains slowed to the vanishing point.
The entire decade of the 1970s did not witness a productivity advance equivalent to even one years progress in the preceding two decades.
At the new rate, it would take five hundred more years to bring about another doubling of the average workers standard of living.
The median income of the average American family stagnated in the two decades after 1970, and failed to decline only because of the addition of working wives wages to the family income (see the chart on p.
947).
The rising baby-boom generation now faced the depressing prospect of a living standard that would be lower than that of their parents.
As the postwar wave of robust economic growth crested by the early 1970s, at home and abroad the can do American spirit gave way to an unaccustomed sense of limits.
What caused the sudden slump in productivity?
Some observers cited the increasing presence in the work force of women and teenagers, who typically had fewer skills than adult male workers and were less likely to take the full-time, long-term jobs  where skills might be developed.
Other commentators blamed declining investment in new machinery, the heavy costs of compliance with government-imposed safety and health regulations, and the general shift of the American economy from manufacturing to services, where productivity gains were allegedly more difficult to achieve and measure.
Yet in the last analysis, much mystery attends the productivity slowdown, and economists have wrestled inconclusively with the puzzle.
The Vietnam War also precipitated painful  economic distortions.
The disastrous conflict in Southeast Asia drained tax dollars from needed improvements in education, deflected scientific skill and manufacturing capacity from the civilian sector, and touched off a sickening spiral of inflation.
Sharply rising oil prices in the 1970s also fed inflation, but its deepest roots lay in government policies of the 1960sespecially Lyndon Johnsons insistence on simultaneously fighting the war in Vietnam and funding the Great Society programs at home, all without a tax increase to finance the added expenditures.
Both military spending and welfare spending are inherently inflationary (in the absence of offsetting tax collections), because they put dollars in peoples hands without adding to the supply of goods that those dollars can buy.
When too many dollars chase too few goods, prices riseas they did astonishingly in the 1970s.
The cost of living more than tripled in the dozen years following Richard Nixons inauguration, in the longest and steepest inflationary cycle in American history.
Other weaknesses in the nations economy were also laid bare by the abrupt reversal of Americas financial fortunes in the 1970s.
The competitive advantage of many major American businesses had Current Inflation -adjusted (1970 dollars) 1970 1975 1980 1985 1995 2000 (est.
) 1990 U.S.
Dollars (in thousands) 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Median Family Income, 19702000 During the long postWorld War II economic boom (from about 1950 to 1970), family incomes increased dramatically, but after 1970 real, or inflation-adjusted, incomes stagnated.
Prosperity at the end of the twentieth century has led to recent increases.
(Sources: U.S.
Census Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics.
) been so enormous after World War II that they had small incentive to modernize plants and seek more efficient methods of production.
The defeated German and Japanese people had meanwhile clawed their way out of the ruins of war and built wholly new factories with the most up-to-date technology and management techniques.
By the 1970s their efforts paid handsome rewards, as they came to dominate industries like steel, automobiles, and consumer electronicsfields in which the United States had once been unchallengeable.
The poor economic performance of the 1970s hung over the decade like a pall.
It frustrated both policymakers and citizens who keenly remembered the growth and optimism of the quarter-century since World War II.
The overachieving postwar generation had never met a problem it could not solve.
But now a stalemated, unpopular war and a stagnant, unresponsive economy heralded the end of the self-confident postwar era.
With it ended the liberal dream, vivid since New Deal days, that an affluent society could spend its way to social justice.
Inaugurated on January 20, 1969, Richard Nixon urged the American people, torn with dissension over Vietnam and race relations, to stop shouting at one another.
Yet the new president seemed an unlikely conciliator of the clashing forces that appeared to be ripping apart American society.
Solitary and suspicious by nature, Nixon could be brittle and testy in the face of opposition.
He also harbored bitter resentments against the liberal establishment that had cast him into the political darkness for much of the preceding decade.
Yet Nixon brought one hugely valuable asset with him to the White Househis broad knowledge and thoughtful expertise in foreign affairs.
With calculating shrewdness he applied himself to putting Americas  foreign-policy house in order.
The first burning need was to quiet the public uproar over Vietnam.
President Nixons announced policy, called Vietnamization, was to withdraw the 540,000 U.S.
troops in South Vietnam over an extended period.
The South Vietnamesewith American money, weapons, training, and advice could then gradually take over the burden of fighting their own war.
The so-called Nixon Doctrine thus evolved.
It proclaimed that the United States would honor its existing defense commitments but that in the future, Asians and others would have to fight their own wars without the support of large bodies of American ground troops.
Nixon sought not to end the war, but to win it by other means, without the further spilling of American blood.
But even this much involvement was distasteful to the American doves, many of whom demanded a withdrawal that was prompt, complete, unconditional, and irreversible.
Antiwar protesters staged a massive national Vietnam moratorium in October 1969, as nearly 100,000 people jammed the Boston Common and some 50,000 filed by the White House carrying lighted candles.
Undaunted, Nixon launched his own homefront counteroffensive.
On November 3, 1969, he delivered a dramatic televised appeal to the great silent majority, who presumably supported the war.
Though ostensibly conciliatory, Nixons appeal was in fact deeply divisive, as he sought to carve out a political constituency that would back his policies.
His intentions soon became clear when he unleashed tough-talking Vice President Agnew to attack the misleading news media, as well as the effete corps of impudent snobs and the nattering nabobs of negativism who demanded quick withdrawal from Vietnam.
Nixon himself in 1970 C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 sneered at the student antiwar demonstrators as bums.
By January 1970 the Vietnam conflict had become the longest in American history and, with 40,000 killed and over 250,000 wounded, the third most costly foreign war in the nations experience.
It had also become grotesquely unpopular, even among troops in the field.
Because draft policies largely exempted college students and men with critical civilian skills, the armed forces in Vietnam were largely composed of the least privileged young Americans.
Especially in the wars early stages, African-Americans were disproportionately represented in the army and accounted for a disproportionately high share of combat fatalities.
Black and white soldiers alike fought not only against the Vietnamese enemy but also against the coiled fear of floundering through booby-trapped swamps and steaming jungles, often unable to distinguish friend from foe among the Vietnamese peasants.
Drug abuse, mutiny, and sabotage dulled the armys fighting edge.
Morale appeared to have plummeted to rock bottom when rumors filtered out of Vietnam that soldiers were fragging their own officers murdering them with fragmentation grenades.
Domestic disgust with the war was further deepened in 1970 by revelations that in 1968 American troops had massacred innocent women and children in the village of My Lai.
Increasingly desperate for a quick end to the demoralizing conflict, Nixon widened the war in 1970 by ordering an attack on Vietnams neighbor, Cambodia.
For several years the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong had been using Cambodia, bordering South Vietnam on the west, as a springboard for troops, weapons, and supplies.
Suddenly, on April 29, 1970, without consulting Congress, Nixon ordered American forces to join with the South Vietnamese in cleaning out the enemy sanctuaries in officially neutral Cambodia.
Restless students nationwide responded to the Cambodian invasion with rock throwing, window smashing, and arson.
At Kent State University in Ohio, jumpy members of the National Guard fired into a noisy crowd, killing four and wounding many more; at Jackson State College in Mississippi, the highway patrol discharged volleys at a student dormitory, killing two black students.
The nation fell prey to turmoil as rioters and arsonists convulsed the land.
For years we disposed of the enemy dead like so much garbage.
We stuck cigarettes in the mouths of corpses, put  their hands, cut off their ears to wear around our necks.
We incinerated them with napalm, atomized them with B-52 strikes, shoved them out the doors of helicopters above the South China Sea.
All we did was count, count bodies.
Count dead human beings.
That was our fundamental military strategy.
Body count.
And the count kept going up.
Nixon withdrew the American troops from Cambodia on June 29, 1970, after only two months.
But in America the Cambodian invasion deepened the bitterness between hawks and doves, as right-wing groups physically assaulted leftists.
Disillusionment with whiteys war increased ominously among African-Americans in the armed forces.
The Senate (though not the House) overwhelmingly repealed the Gulf of Tonkin blank check that Congress had given Johnson in 1964 and sought ways to restrain Nixon.
The youth of America, still aroused, were only slightly mollified when the government reduced draft calls and shortened the period of draftability, on a lottery basis, from eight years to one year.
They were similarly pleased, though not pacified, when the Twenty-sixth Amendment in 1971 lowered the voting age to eighteen (see the Appendix).
In the spring of 1971, mass rallies and marches once more erupted from coast to coast.
New combustibles fueled the fires of antiwar discontent in June 1971, when  top-secret Pentagon study of Americas involvement in the Vietnam War.
These Pentagon Papers, leaked to the  Daniel Ellsberg, laid bare the blunders and deceptions of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, especially the provoking of the 1964 North Vietnamese attack in the Gulf of Tonkin.
As the antiwar firestorm flared ever higher, Nixon concluded that the road out of Vietnam ran through Beijing and Moscow.
The two great communist powers, the Soviet Union and China, were clashing bitterly over their rival interpretations of Marxism.
Nixon astutely perceived that the Chinese-Soviet tension afforded the United States an opportunity to play off one antagonist against the other and to enlist the aid of both in pressuring North Vietnam into peace.
Nixons thinking was reinforced by his national security adviser, Dr.
Henry A. Kissinger.
Bespectacled and German-accented, Kissinger had reached America as a youth when his parents fled Hitlers anti-Jewish persecutions.
In 1969 the former Harvard professor had begun meeting secretly on Nixons behalf with North Vietnamese officials in Paris to negotiate an end to the war in Vietnam.
He was meanwhile preparing the presidents path to Beijing and Moscow.
Nixon, heretofore an uncompromising anticommunist, announced to a startled nation in July 1971 that he had accepted an invitation to visit China the following year.
He made his historic journey in February 1972.
Between glass-clinking toasts and walks on the fabled Great Wall of China, he paved the way for improved relations between Washington and Beijing.
Nixon next traveled to Moscow in May 1972  to play his China card in a game of high-stakes diplomacy in the Kremlin.
The Soviets, hungry for American foodstuffs and alarmed over the possibility of intensified rivalry with an American-backed China, were ready to deal.
Nixons visits ushered in an era of  communist powers.
Dtente resulted in several significant agreements.
One product of eased relations was the great grain deal of 1972a three-year arrangement by which the food-rich United States agreed to sell the Soviets at least $750 million worth of wheat, corn, and other cereals.
Far more important were steps to stem the dangerously frantic competition in nuclear arms.
The C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 first major achievement was an antiballistic missile (ABM) treaty, which limited each nation to two clusters of defensive missiles.
The second significant pact was an agreement, known as SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks), to freeze the numbers of longrange nuclear missiles for five years.
These accords, both ratified in 1972, constituted a long-overdue first step toward slowing the arms race.
Yet even though the ABM treaty forbade elaborate defensive systems, the United States forged ahead with the development of MIRVs (multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles), designed to overcome any defense by saturating it with large numbers of warheads, several to a rocket.
Predictably, the Soviets proceeded to MIRV their own missiles, and the arms race ratcheted up to a still more perilous plateau, with over sixteen thousand nuclear warheads deployed by both sides by the end of the 1980s.
Nixons dtente diplomacy did, to some extent, deice the Cold War.
Moreover, by checkmating and co-opting the two great communist powers, the president had cleverly set the stage for Americas exit from Vietnam.
But the concluding act in that wrenching tragedy still remained to be played.
Nixon had lashed out during the campaign at the permissiveness and judicial activism of the Supreme Court presided over by Chief Justice Earl Warren.
Following his appointment in 1953, the jovial Warren had led the Court into a series of decisions that drastically affected sexual freedom, the rights of criminals, the practice of religion, civil rights, and the structure of political representation.
The decisions of the Warren Court reflected its deep concern for the individual, no matter how lowly.
In   struck down a state law that prohibited the use of contraceptives, even among married couples.
The Court proclaimed (critics said invented) a right of privacy that soon provided the basis for decisions protecting womens abortion rights.
In 1963 the Court held  that all defendants in serious criminal cases were entitled to legal counsel, even if they were too poor to afford it.
More controversial were the rulings in two cases that ensured the right of the accused to remain silent and to enjoy other protections when accused of a crime.
In this way safeguards were erected against confessions extorted under the rubber hose and other torture.
Critics of these decisions were loud in their condemnation of crook coddling and demanded that the courts handcuff criminals, not the cops.
Freedom of the press was also emphatically endorsed by the Warren Court in the case of  imously that public figures could sue for libel only if they could prove that malice had motivated their defamers.
The decision opened a wide door for freewheeling criticism of the public actions as well as the private lives of politicians and other officials.
Nor did the Court shy away from explosive religious issues.
In two stunning decisions,  prayers and Bible reading in the public schools.
These rulings were based on the First Amendment, which requires the separation of church and state, but to many religious believers they seemed to put the justices in the same bracket with atheistic communists.
Cynics predicted that the old goats in black coats would soon be erasing In God We Trust from all coins.
Infuriating to many southerners was the  determination of the Court, following the schooldesegregation decision of 1954, to support black people in civil rights cases.
Five southern state  legislatures officially nullified the sociological Supreme Court decision, but they in turn were overruled by the high tribunal.
In general, it held that the states could not deny to blacks the rights that were extended to whites.
Conservatives maligned the Warren Court for not interpreting the Constitution but rewriting it, at the expense of states rights and other constitutional guarantees.
It was acting, they charged, too much like a legislature and not enough like a judicial body.
The Warren Court also struck at the overrepresentation in state legislatures of cow-pasture agricultural districts.
Adopting the principle of one-manone-vote, the Court in  that the state legislatures, both upper and lower houses, would have to be reapportioned according to the human population, irrespective of cows.
States righters and assorted right-wingers raised anew the battle cry Impeach Earl Warren.
But the legislatures grudgingly went ahead with reapportionment.
From 1954 on, the Court came under relentless criticism, the bitterest since New Deal days.
Its foes made numerous but unsuccessful efforts to clip its wings through bills in Congress or through constitutional amendments.
But for better or worse, the Court was grappling with stubborn social problems spawned by midcentury tensions, evenor especiallyif duly elected legislatures failed to do so.
Fulfilling campaign promises, President Nixon undertook to change the Courts philosophical  complexion.
Taking advantage of several vacancies, he sought appointees who would strictly interpret the Constitution, cease meddling in social and political questions, and not coddle radicals or criminals.
The Senate in 1969 speedily confirmed his nomination of white-maned Warren E. Burger of Minnesota to succeed the retiring Earl Warren as chief justice.
Before the end of 1971, the Court counted four conservative Nixon appointments out of nine members.
Yet Nixon was to learn the ironic lesson that many presidents have learned about their Supreme Court appointees: once seated on the high bench, the justices are fully free to think and decide according to their own beliefs, not according to the presidents expectations.
The Burger Court that Nixon shaped proved reluctant to dismantle the liberal rulings of the Warren Court; it even produced the most controversial judicial opinion of modern times, the momentous  which legalized abortion (see p.
989).
Surprisingly, Nixon presided over significant expansion of the welfare programs that conservative Republicans routinely denounced.
He approved C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 increased appropriations for entitlements like Food Stamps and Medicaid, as well as for the largest federal welfare program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), which especially targeted single mothers of young children.
Nixon also implemented a new federal program, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which gave generous benefits to the indigent aged, blind, and disabled.
He signed legislation in 1972 that raised Social Security old-age pensions and provided for automatic increases when the cost of living rose more than 3 percent in any year.
Ironically, though designed to protect the elderly against the ravages of inflation, this indexing actually helped to fuel the inflationary fires that raged out of control later in the decade.
Yet in the short run, Nixons generous expansion of Great Society programsalong with continuing economic growthhelped reduce the nations poverty rate to 11 percent in 1973, its lowest level in modern history.
Amid much controversy, Nixon also did the Great Society one better in his attack on racial discrimination.
His so-called Philadelphia Plan of 1969 required construction-trade unions working on federal contracts in Philadelphia to establish goals and timetables for the hiring of black apprentices.
Nixon may have been motivated in part by a desire to weaken the forces of liberalism by driving a wedge between blacks and trade unions.
But whatever his reasoning, the presidents new policy had far-reaching implications.
Soon extended to all federal contracts, the Philadelphia Plan in effect required thousands of employers to meet hiring quotas or to establish set-asides for minority subcontractors.
Nixons Philadelphia Plan drastically altered the meaning of affirmative action.
Lyndon Johnson had intended affirmative action to protect  and escalated affirmative action into a program that conferred privileges on certain  Court went along with Nixons approach.
In  hibited intelligence tests or other devices that had the effect of excluding minorities or women from certain jobs.
The Courts ruling strongly suggested that the only sure protection against charges of discrimination was to hire minority workersor admit minority studentsin proportion to their presence in the population.
Together the actions of Nixon and the Court opened broad employment and educational opportunities for minorities and women.
They also opened a Pandoras box of protest.
Critics assailed the new style of affirmative action as reverse discrimination.
They objected especially that such a sweeping policy had been created by executive order and judicial decision, not by democratically elected representatives in the legislature.
Yet what other remedy was there, defenders asked, to offset centuries of prejudice and opportunity denied?
Among the other major legacies of the Nixon years was the creation in 1970 of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and a companion body, the Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA).
Their births climaxed two decades of mounting concern for the environment, beginning with the establishment in Los Angeles of the Air  Pollution Control Office in 1950.
Author Rachel  Carson gave the environmental movement a huge boost in 1962 when she published  enormously effective piece of latter-day muckraking that exposed the poisonous effects of pesticides.
Legislatively armed by the Clean Air Act of 1970, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and similar laws, EPA and OSHA stood on the frontline of the battle for ecological sanity.
They made notable progress in the ensuing decades on reducing automobile emissions and cleaning up befouled waterways and toxic waste sites.
Impressed by the new environmentalist mood, Congress refused after 1972 to pay for any more of the huge irrigation projects that had wateredand ecologically transformedmuch of the arid West over the preceding half century.
Worried about creeping inflation (then running at about 5 percent), Nixon overcame his distaste for economic controls and imposed a ninety-day wage and price freeze in 1971.
To stimulate the nations sagging exports, he next stunned the world by taking the United States off the gold standard and devaluing the dollar.
These moves effectively ended the Bretton Woods system of international currency stabilization that had functioned for more that a quarter of a century after World War II.
Elected as a minority president, with only 43 percent of the vote in 1968, Nixon devised a clever but cynical plancalled the southern strategyto achieve a solid majority in 1972.
His Supreme Court nominations constituted an important part of his scheme.
The southern strategy emphasized an appeal to white voters by soft-pedaling civil rights and openly opposing school busing to achieve racial balance.
But as fate would have it, the southern strategy became superfluous as foreign policy dominated the presidential campaign of 1972.
Vietnam continued to be the burning issue.
Nearly four years had passed since Nixon had promised, as a presidential candidate, to end the war and win the peace.
Yet in the spring of 1972, the fighting escalated anew to alarming levels when the North Vietnamese, heavily equipped with foreign tanks, burst through the demilitarized zone (DMZ) separating the two Vietnams.
Nixon reacted promptly by launching massive bombing attacks on strategic centers in North Vietnam, including Hanoi, the capital.
Gambling heavily on foreign forbearance, he also ordered the dropping of contact mines to blockade the principal harbors of North Vietnam.
Either Moscow or Beijing, or both, could have responded explosively, but neither did, thanks to Nixons shrewd diplomacy.
The North Vietnamese offensive finally ground to a halt.
The continuing Vietnam conflict spurred the rise of South Dakota senator George McGovern to the 1972 Democratic nomination.
McGoverns promise to pull the remaining American troops out of Vietnam in ninety days earned him the backing of the large antiwar element in the party.
But his appeal to racial minorities, feminists, leftists, and youth alienated the traditional working-class backbone of his party.
Moreover, the discovery shortly after the convention that McGoverns running mate, Missouri senator Thomas Eagleton, had undergone psychiatric care forced Eagletons removal from the ticket and virtually doomed McGoverns candidacy.
Nixons campaign emphasized that he had wound down the Democratic war in Vietnam from some 540,000 troops to about 30,000.
His candidacy received an added boost just twelve days before  the election when the high-flying Dr.
Kissinger announced that peace is at hand in Vietnam and that an agreement would be settled in a few days.
Nixon won the election in a landslide.
His lopsided victory encompassed every state except Massachusetts and the nonstate District of Columbia.
He piled up 520 electoral votes to 17 for McGovern and a popular majority of 47,169,911 to 29,170,383 votes.
McGovern had counted on a large number of young peoples votes, but less than half the 1821 age group even bothered to register to vote.
Nixons claim that the election gave him an unprecedented mandate for his policies was weakened by Republican election losses in both the House and Senate.
The dove of peace, at hand in Vietnam just before the balloting, took flight after the election, when Nixon refused to be stampeded into accepting terms pocked with obvious loopholes.
After the fighting on both sides had again escalated, he launched a furious two-week bombing of North Vietnam in an ironhanded effort to force the North Vietnamese back to the conference table.
This attack was the heaviest of the war and resulted in substantial losses of Americas big B-52 bombers.
But this merciless pounding drove the North VietC HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 namese negotiators to agree to cease-fire arrangements on January 23, 1973, nearly three months after peace was prematurely proclaimed.
Nixon hailed the face-saving cease-fire agreements as peace with honor, but the boast rang hollow.
The United States was to withdraw its remaining 27,000 or so troops and could reclaim some 560 American prisoners of war.
The government of South Vietnam would be permitted to continue receiving limited U.S.
support but no more U.S.
fighting forces.
An election was eventually to be held to determine the future of the country.
The North Vietnamese were allowed to keep some 145,000 troops in South Vietnam, where they could be used to spearhead a powerful new offensive when the time seemed ripe.
Ominously, the North Vietnamese still occupied about 30 percent of South Vietnam.
The shaky peace was in reality little more than a thinly disguised American retreat.
Nixons electoral triumph was soon sullied by the so-called Watergate scandals.
On June 17, 1972, some two months before his renomination, a bungled burglary had occurred in the Democratic headquarters, located in the Watergate apartment-office complex in Washington.
Five men were arrested inside the building with electronic bugging equipment in their possession.
They were working for the Republican Committee for the Re-election of the Presidentpopularly known as CREEPwhich had managed to raise tens of millions of dollars, often  by secretive, unethical, or unlawful means.
CREEP had also engaged in a dirty tricks campaign of espionage and sabotage, including faked documents, directed against Democratic candidates in the campaign of 1972.
The Watergate break-in was only the tip of  an iceberg in a slimy sea of corruption that made the Grant and Harding scandals look almost respectable.
Several prominently placed White House aides and advisers were forced to resign.
Many were involved in the criminal obstruction of justice through tangled cover-ups or payments of hush money.
By early 1974 twenty-nine people had been indicted, had pleaded guilty, or had been convicted of Watergate-related crimes.
The scandal in Washington also provoked the improper or illegal use of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency.
Even the Internal Revenue Service was called upon by Nixons aides to audit or otherwise harass political opponents and others who had fallen into disfavor.
A White House enemies list turned up that included innocent citizens who were to be hounded WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
45 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
7 ARIZ.
6 ALASKA 3 S.D.
4 KANSAS 7 OKLA.
8 MICH.
21 N.Y.
41 N.D.
3 MINN.
10 IOWA 8 NEBR.
5 MO.
12 ARK.
6 LA.
10 TEXAS 26 N.M.
4 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
12 FLA.
17 TENN.
10 N.C.
13 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W.VA.
6 MD.
10 PA.
27 OHIO 25 IND.
13 ILL.
26 WISC.
11 KY.
9 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
14 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
17 DEL.
3 HAWAII 4 D.C.
3 NixonRepublican McGovernDemocratic Presidential Election of 1972  (with electoral vote by state) Nixon buried McGovern in this election, but when his administration soon thereafter began  to sink in a swamp of scandals, bumper stickers appeared in Boston proclaiming, Dont blame me, Im from Massachusetts.
or prosecuted in various ways.
In the name of national security, Nixons aides had authorized a burglary of the files of Dr.
Daniel Ellsbergs psychiatrist, so great was the determination to destroy the man who had leaked the Pentagon Papers.
This was the most notorious exploit of the White House plumbers unit, created to plug up leaks of confidential information.
A select Senate committee, headed by the aging Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina, conducted a prolonged and widely televised series of hearings in 19731974.
John Dean III, a former White House lawyer with a remarkable memory, testified glibly and at great length as to the involvement of the top echelons in the White House, including the president, in the cover-up of the Watergate break-in.
Dean in effect accused Nixon of the crime of obstructing justice.
But the committee then had only the unsupported word of Dean against weighty White House protestations of innocence.
A bombshell exploded before Senator Ervins committee in July 1973 when a former presidential aide reported the presence in the White House of bugging equipment, installed under the presidents authority.
President Nixons conversations, in person or on the telephone, had been recorded on tape without notifying the other parties that electronic eavesdropping was taking place.
Nixon had emphatically denied prior knowledge of the Watergate burglary or involvement in the cover-up.
Now Deans sensational testimony could be checked against the White House tapes, and the Senate committee could better determine who was telling the truth.
But for months Nixon flatly refused to produce the taped evidence.
He took refuge behind various principles, including separation of powers and executive privilege (confidentiality).
But all of them were at least constitutionally dubious, especially when invoked to cover up crime or obstruct justice.
The anxieties of the White House deepened when Vice President Agnew was forced to resign in October 1973 for taking bribes or kickbacks from Maryland contractors while governor and also as vice president.
President Nixon himself was now in danger of being removed by the impeachment route, so Congress invoked the Twenty-fifth Amendment (see the Appendix) to replace Agnew with a twelve-term congressman from Michigan, Gerald (Jerry) Ford.
His record in public life was politically respectable and his financial affairs proved to be above suspicion at a time when unquestioned honesty was in short supply.
C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 Ten days after Agnews resignation came the famous Saturday Night Massacre (October 20, 1973).
Archibald Cox, a Harvard law professor appointed as a special prosecutor by Nixon in May, issued a subpoena for relevant tapes and other documents from the White House.
A cornered Nixon thereupon ordered the firing of Cox and then accepted the resignations of the attorney general and the deputy attorney general because they  refused to fire Cox.
As if Watergate were not enough, the constitutionality of Nixons continued aerial battering of Cambodia came under increasing fire.
In July 1973 America was shocked to learn that the U.S.
Air Force had already secretly conducted some thirty-five hundred bombing raids against North Vietnamese positions in Cambodia.
They had begun in March 1969 and had continued for some fourteen months prior to the open American incursion in May 1970.
The most disturbing feature of these sky forays was that while they were going on, American officials, including the president, were avowing that Cambodian neutrality was being respected.
Countless Americans began to wonder what kind of representative government they had if the United States was fighting a war they knew nothing about.
Defiance followed secretiveness.
After the Vietnam cease-fire in January 1973, Nixon openly carried on his large-scale bombing of communist forces in order to help the rightist Cambodian government.
This stretching of presidential war-making powers met furious opposition from the public and from a clear majority in both houses of Congress, which repeatedly tried to stop the bombing by cutting off appropriations.
But Nixons vetoes of such legislation were always sustained by at least one-third-plus-one votes in the House.
Finally, with appropriations running short, Nixon agreed to a compromise in June 1973 whereby he would end the Cambodian bombing six weeks later and seek congressional approval of any future action in that bomb-blasted country.
The years of bombing had inflicted grisly wounds on Cambodia.
Incessant American air raids had blasted its people, shredded its economy, and revolutionized its politics.
The long-suffering Cambodians soon groaned under the sadistic heel of Pol Pot, a murderous tyrant who dispatched as many as 2 million of his people to their graves.
He was forced from power, ironically enough, only by a full-dress Vietnamese invasion in 1978, followed by a military occupation that dragged on for a decade.
Congressional opposition to the expansion of presidential war-making powers by Johnson and Nixon led to the War Powers Act in November 1973.
Passed over Nixons veto, it required the president to report to Congress within forty-eight hours after committing troops to a foreign conflict or substantially enlarging American combat units in a foreign country.
Such a limited authorization would have to end within sixty days unless Congress extended it for thirty more days.
Compelling Nixon to end the bombing of Cambodia in August 1973 was but one manifestation of what came to be called the New Isolationism.
The draft had ended in January 1973, although it was retained on a standby basis.
Future members of the armed forces were to be well-paid volunteersa change that greatly eased tensions among youth.
Insistent demands arose in Congress for reducing American armed forces abroad, especially because some 300,000 remained in Europe more than a quarter of a century after Hitlers downfall.
The argument often heard was that the Western European countries, with more population than the Soviet Union, ought by now to be willing and able to provide for their own defense against the forces of communism.
But President Nixon, fearful of a weakened hand in the high-stakes game of power politics, headed off all serious attempts at troop reduction.
Adding to Nixons problems, the long-rumbling Middle East erupted anew in October 1973, when the rearmed Syrians and Egyptians unleashed surprise attacks on Israel in an attempt to regain the territory they had lost in the Six-Day War of 1967.
With the Israelis in desperate retreat, Kissinger, who had become secretary of state in September, hastily flew to Moscow in an effort to restrain the Soviets, who were arming the attackers.
Believing that the Kremlin was poised to fly combat troops to the Suez area, Nixon placed Americas nuclear forces on alert and ordered a gigantic airlift of nearly $2 billion in war materials to the Israelis.
This assistance helped save the day, as the Israelis aggressively turned the tide and had stormed to a stones throw from Cairo when American diplomacy brought about an uneasy cease-fire.
Americas policy of backing Israel against its oilrich neighbors exacted a heavy penalty.
Late in October 1973, the Arab nations suddenly clamped an embargo on oil for the United States and for other countries supporting Israel.
Americans had to suffer through a long, cold winter of lowered thermostats and speedometers.
Lines of automobiles at service stations lengthened as tempers shortened and a business recession deepened.
The energy crisis suddenly energized a number of long-deferred projects.
Congress approved a costly Alaska pipeline and a national speed limit of fifty-five miles per hour to conserve fuel.
Agitation mounted for heavier use of coal and nuclear power, despite the environmental threat they posed.
The five months of the Arab blackmail embargo in 1974 clearly signaled the end of an era the era of cheap and abundant energy.
A twentyyear surplus of world oil supplies had masked the fact that since 1948 the United States had been a net importer of oil.
American oil production peaked in 1970 and then began an irreversible decline.
Blissfully unaware of their dependence on foreign suppliers, Americans, like revelers on a binge, had more than tripled their oil consumption since the end of World War II.
The number of automobiles increased 250 percent between 1949 and 1972, and Detroits engineers gave nary a thought to building more fuel-efficient engines.
By 1974 America was oil addicted and extremely vulnerable to any interruption in supplies.
That stark fact colored the diplomatic and economic history of the 1980s and 1990s.
The Middle East loomed ever larger on the map of Americas strategic interests, until the United States in 1990 at last found itself pulled into a shooting war with Iraq to protect its oil supplies.
The Middle Eastern sheiks, flexing their economic muscles through OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries), approximately quadrupled their price for crude oil after lifting the embargo in 1974.
Huge new oil bills wildly disrupted the U.S.
balance of international trade and added further fuel to the already raging fires of inflation.
C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 American B-52 bombers dropped about 104,000 tons of explosives on Communist sanctuaries in neutralist Cambodia during a series of raids in 1969 and 1970. .
The secret bombing was acknowledged by the Pentagon the Monday after a former Air Force major .
described how he falsified reports on Cambodian air operations and destroyed records on the bombing missions actually flown.
The United States took the lead in forming the International Energy Agency in 1974 as a counterweight to OPEC, and various sectors of the economy, including Detroits carmakers, began their slow, grudging adjustment to the rudely dawning age of energy dependency.
But full reconciliation to that uncomfortable reality was a long time coming.
Political tribulations added to the nations cup of woe in 1974.
The continuing impeachment inquiry cast damning doubts on Nixons integrity.
Responding at last to the House Judiciary Committees demand for the Watergate tapes, Nixon agreed in the spring of 1974 to the publication of relevant portions of the tapes, declaring that these would vindicate him.
But substantial sections of the wanted tapes were missing, and Nixons frequent obscenities were excised with the phrase expletive deleted.
Confronted with demands for the rest of the material, Nixon flatly refused.
On July 24, 1974, the president suffered a disastrous setback when the Supreme Court unanimously ruled that executive privilege gave him no right to withhold from the special prosecutor portions of tapes relevant to criminal activity.
Skating on thin ice over hot water, Nixon reluctantly complied.
The House Judiciary Committee pressed ahead with its articles of impeachment.
The key vote came late in July 1974, when the committee adopted the first article, which charged obstruction of the administration of justice, including Watergaterelated crimes.
Two other articles were later approved by the committee accusing Nixon of having abused the powers of his office and of having shown contempt of Congress by ignoring lawful subpoenas for relevant tapes and other evidence.
Seeking to soften the impact of inevitable disclosure, Nixon voluntarily took a step, on August 5, 1974, that had a devastating effect on what remained of his credibility.
He now made public three subpoenaed tapes of conversations with his chief aide on June 23, 1972.
One of them had him giving orders, six days after the Watergate break-in, to use the CIA to hold back an inquiry by the FBI.
Now Nixons own tape-recorded words convicted him of having been an active party to the attempted coverup, in itself the crime of obstructing justice.
More than that, he had solemnly told the American people on television that he had known nothing of the Watergate whitewash until about nine months later.
The public backlash proved to be overwhelming.
Republican leaders in Congress concluded that the guilty and unpredictable Nixon was a loose cannon on the deck of the ship of state.
They frankly informed the president that his impeachment by the full House and removal by the Senate were foregone conclusions.
They made it clear that he would best serve his nation, his party, and himself by resigning with honor, or a semblance of it.
If convicted by the Senate, he would lose all his normal retirement  benefits; if he resigned he could retain themmore than $150,000 a yearand retire in royal splendor.
Left with no better choice, Nixon choked back his tears and announced his resignation in a dramatic television appearance on August 8, 1974.
Few presidents had flown so high, and none had sunk so low.
In his Farewell Address, Nixon admitted having made some judgments that were wrong but insisted that he had always acted in what I believed at the time to be the best interests of the nation.
Unconvinced, countless Americans would change the song Hail to the Chief to Jail to the Chief.
The nation had survived a wrenching constitutional crisis, which proved that the impeachment machinery forged by the Founding Fathers could work when public opinion overwhelmingly demanded that it be implemented.
The principles that no person is above the law and that presidents must be held to strict accountability for their acts were strengthened.
The United States of America, on the eve of its two-hundredth birthday as a republic, had given an impressive demonstration of self-discipline and self-government to the rest of the world.
Gerald Rudolph Ford, the first man to be made president solely by a vote of Congress, entered the besmirched White House in August 1974 with serious handicaps.
He was widelyand unfairly suspected of being little more than a dim-witted former college football player.
President Johnson had sneered that Jerry was so lacking in brainpower that he could not walk and chew gum at the same time.
Worse, Ford had been selected, not elected, vice president, following Spiro Agnews resignation in disgrace.
The sour odor of illegitimacy hung about this president without precedent.
Then, out of a clear sky, Ford granted a complete pardon to Nixon for any crimes he may have committed as president, discovered or undiscovered.
Democrats were outraged.
They wanted irontoothed justice, even vengeance.
They heatedly charged, without persuasive evidence, that Ford was carrying out a buddy deal that had been cooked up when Nixon nominated him for the vice presidency.
Ford explained that he only wanted to end Nixons private agony, heal the festering wounds in the body C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 The technological capability to record Oval Office conversations combined with Richard Nixons obsession with documenting his presidency to give the publicand the Senate committee investigating his role in the break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Watergate Office Towerrare access to personal conversations between the president and his closest advisers.
This tape, which undeniably exposed Nixons central role in constructing a cover-up of the Watergate break-in, was made on Nixons first day back in Washington after the botched burglary of June 17, 1972.
In this conversation with White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman, Nixon devised a plan to block a widening F.B.I.
investigation by instructing the director of the C.I.A.
to deflect any further F.B.I.
snooping on the grounds that it would endanger sensitive C.I.A.
operations.
Nixon refused to turn over this and other tapes to Senate investigators until so ordered by the Supreme Court on July 24, 1974.
Within four days of its release on August 5, Nixon was forced to resign.
After eighteen months of protesting his innocence of the crime and his ignorance of any effort to obstruct justice, Nixon was finally undone by the evidence in this incriminating smoking gun tape.
While tapes documented two straight years of Nixons Oval Office conversations, other presidents, such as Franklin Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, and Lyndon Baines Johnson, recorded important meetings and crisis deliberations.
Since Watergate, however, it is unlikely that any president has permitted extensive tape recording, depriving historians of a unique insight into the inner-workings of the White House.
Should taped White House discussions be part of the public record of a presidency, and if so, who should have access to them?
What else might historians learn from a tape like this one, besides analyzing the Watergate cover-up?
Haldeman: .
yesterday, they concluded it was not the White House, but are now convinced it is a CIA thing, so the CIA turn off would .
President: Well, not sure of their analysis, Im not going to get that involved.
Im (unintelligible).
Haldeman: No, sir.
We dont want you to.
President: You call them in.
President: Good.
Good deal!
Play it tough.
Thats the way they play it and thats the way we are going to play it.
Haldeman: O.K.
Well do it.
President: Yeah, when I saw that news summary item, I of course knew it was a bunch of crap, but I thought ah, well its good to have them off on this wild hair thing because when they start bugging us, which they have, well know our little boys will not know how to handle it.
I hope they will though.
You never know.
Maybe, you think about it.
Good!
President: When you get in these people when you .
get these people in, say: Look, the problem is that this will open the whole,  the whole Bay of Pigs thing, and the President just feels that ah, without going into the details .
dont, dont lie to them to the extent to say there is no involvement, but just say this  is sort of a comedy of errors, bizarre, without getting into it, the President believes that it  is going to open the whole Bay  of Pigs thing up again.
And,  ah because these people are plugging for, for keeps and that they should call the FBI in and say that we wish for the country, dont go any further into this case, period!
politic, and let the country get on with its business, undistracted by a possibly sensational trial.
But lingering suspicions about the circumstances of the pardon cast a dark shadow over Fords prospects of being elected president in his own right in 1976.
Ford at first sought to enhance the so-called dtente with the Soviet Union that Nixon had crafted.
In July 1975 President Ford joined leaders from thirty-four other nations in Helsinki, Finland, to sign several sets of historic accords.
One group of agreements officially wrote an end to World War II by finally legitimizing the Soviet-dictated boundaries of Poland and other Eastern European countries.
In return, the Soviets signed a third basket of agreements, guaranteeing more liberal exchanges of people and information between East and West and protecting certain basic human rights.
The Helsinki accords kindled small dissident movements in Eastern Europe and even in the USSR itself, but the Soviets soon poured ice water on these sputtering flames of freedom.
Moscows restrictions on Jewish emigration had already, in December 1974, prompted Congress to add punitive restrictions to a U.S.-Soviet trade bill.
Western Europeans, especially the West Germans, cheered the Helsinki conference as a milestone of dtente.
But in the United States, critics increasingly charged that dtente was proving to be a one-way street.
American grain and technology flowed across the Atlantic to the USSR, and little of comparable importance flowed back.
And Soviet ships and planes continued to haul great quantities of arms and military technicians to procommunist forces around the globe.
Despite these difficulties, Ford at first clung stubbornly to dtente.
But the American publics fury over Moscows double-dealing so steadily mounted that by the end of his term, the president was refusing even to pronounce the word  public.
The thaw in the Cold War was threatening to prove chillingly brief.
Early in 1975 the North Vietnamese gave full throttle to their long-expected drive southward.
President Ford urged Congress to vote still more weapons for Vietnam, but his plea was in vain, and without the crutch of massive American aid, the South Vietnamese quickly and ingloriously collapsed.
The dam burst so rapidly that the remaining Americans had to be frantically evacuated by helicopter, the last of them on April 29, 1975.
Also rescued were about 140,000 South Vietnamese, most of them so dangerously identified with the Americans that they feared a bloodbath by the victorious comC HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 munists.
Ford compassionately admitted these people to the United States, where they added further seasoning to the melting pot.
Eventually some 500,000 arrived (see Makers of America: The Vietnamese, pp.
964965).
Americas longest, most frustrating war thus ended not with a bang but a whimper.
In a technical sense, the Americans had not lost the war; their client nation had.
The United States had fought the North Vietnamese to a standstill and had then withdrawn its troops in 1973, leaving the South Vietnamese to fight their own war, with generous shipments of costly American aircraft, tanks, and other munitions.
The estimated cost to America was $118 billion in current outlays, together with some 56,000 dead and 300,000 wounded.
The people of the United States had in fact provided just about everything, except the will to winand that could not be injected by outsiders.
Technicalities aside, America had lost more than a war.
It had lost face in the eyes of foreigners, lost its own self-esteem, lost confidence in its military prowess, and lost much of the economic muscle that had made possible its global leadership since World War II.
Americans reluctantly came to realize that their power as well as their pride had been deeply wounded in Vietnam and that recovery would be slow and painful.
As the army limped home from Vietnam, there was little rejoicing on the college campuses, where demonstrators had once braved tear gas and billy clubs to denounce the war.
The antiwar movement, like many of the other protest movements that convulsed the country in the 1960s, had long since splintered and stalled.
One major exception to this pattern stood out: although they had their differences, American feminists showed vitality and momentum.
They won legislative and judicial victories and provoked an intense rethinking of gender roles.
(On the roots of this movement, see Makers of America: The Feminists, pp.
968969.
) Thousands of women marched in the Womens Stride for Equality on the fiftieth anniversary of woman suffrage in 1970.
In 1972 Congress passed Title IX of the Education Amendments, prohibiting sex discrimination in any federally assisted educational program or activity.
Perhaps this acts biggest impact was to create opportunities for girls and womens athletics at schools and colleges, giving birth to a new Title IX generation that would reach maturity in the 1980s and 1990s and help professionalize womens sports as well.
The Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) to the Constitution won congressional approval A t first glance the towns of Westminster and Fountain Valley, California, seem to resemble other California communities nearby.
Tract homes line residential streets; shopping centers flank the busy thoroughfares.
But these are no ordinary American suburbs.
Instead they make up Little Saigons, vibrant outposts of Vietnamese culture in the contemporary United States.
Shops offer exotic Asian merchandise; restaurants serve such delicacies as lemongrass chicken.
These neighborhoods, living reminders of Americas anguish in Vietnam, are a rarely acknowledged consequence of that sorrowful conflict.
Before South Vietnam fell in 1975, few Vietnamese ventured across the Pacific.
Only in 1966 did U.S.
immigration authorities even designate Vietnamese as a separate category of newcomers, and most early immigrants were the wives and children of U.S.
servicemen.
But as the communists closed in on Saigon, many Vietnamese, particularly those who had worked closely with American or South Vietnamese authorities, feared for their future.
Gathering together as many of their extended-family members as they could assemble, thousands of Vietnamese fled for their lives.
In a few hectic days in 1975, some 140,000 Vietnamese escaped before the approaching gunfire, a few dramatically clinging to the bottoms of departing  helicopters.
From Saigon they were conveyed to military bases in Guam and the Philippines.
Another 60,000 less fortunate Vietnamese escaped at the same time over land and sea to Hong Kong and Thailand, where they waited nervously for permission to move on.
To accommodate the refugees, the U.S.
government set up camps across the nation.
Arrivals were crowded into army barracks affording little room and less privacy.
These were boot camps not for military service but for assimilation into American society.
A rigorous program trained the Vietnamese in English, forbade children from speaking their native language in the classroom, and even immersed them in American slang.
Many resented this attempt to mold them, to strip them of their culture.
Their discontent boiled over when authorities prepared to release the refugees from camps and board them with families around the nation.
The resettlement officials had decided to find a sponsor for each Vietnamese familyan American family that would provide food, shelter, and assistance for the refugees until they could fend for themselves.
But the Vietnamese people cherish their traditional extended familiesgrandparents, uncles, aunts, and cousins living communally with parents and children.
Few American sponsors would accommodate a large extended family; fewer Vietnamese families would willingly separate.
The refugees were dispersed to Iowa, Illinois, Pennsylvania, New York, Washington, and California.
But the settlement sites, many of them tucked away in rural districts, offered scant economic opportunities.
The immigrants, who had held mainly skilled or white-collar positions in Vietnam, bristled as they were herded into menial labor.
As soon as they could, they relocated, hastening to established Vietnamese enclaves around San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Dallas.
Soon a second throng of Vietnamese immigrants pushed into these Little Saigons.
Fleeing from the ravages of poverty and from the oppressive communist government, these stragglers had crammed themselves and their few possessions into little boats, hoping to reach Hong Kong or get picked up by ships.
Eventually many of these boat people reached the United States.
Usually less educated than the first arrivals and receiving far less resettlement aid from the U.S.
government, they were, however, more willing to start at the bottom.
Today these two groups total more than half a million people.
Differing in experience and expectations, the Vietnamese share a new home in a strange land.
Their uprooting is an immense, unreckoned consequence of Americas longest war.
in 1972.
It declared, Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.
Twenty-eight states quickly ratified the amendment, first proposed by suffragists in 1923.
Hopes rose that the ERA might soon become the law of the land.
Even the Supreme Court seemed to be on the movements side.
In  discrimination in legislation and employment.
And in the landmark case of  struck down laws prohibiting abortion, arguing that a womans decision to terminate a pregnancy was protected by the constitutional right of privacy.
But the feminist movement soon faced a formidable backlash.
In 1972 President Nixon vetoed a proposal to set up nationwide public day care, saying it would weaken the American family.
Antifeminists blamed the womens movement for the rising divorce rate, which tripled between 1960 and 1976.
And the Catholic Church and the religious right organized a powerful grassroots movement to oppose the legalization of abortion.
For many feminists, the most bitter defeat was the death of the ERA.
With ratification by thirtyeight state legislatures, the amendment would have become part of the Constitution.
Conservative spokeswoman Phyllis Schlafly led the campaign  to stop the ERA.
Its advocates, she charged, were just bitter women seeking a constitutional cure  for their personal problems.
In 1979 Congress extended the deadline for ratification, but ERA opponents dug in their heels.
The amendment died in 1982, three states short of success.
Although the civil rights movement had fractured, race remained an explosive issue in the 1970s.
The Supreme Court in  sided school integrationists when it ruled that desegregation plans could not require students to move across school-district lines.
The decision effectively exempted suburban districts from shouldering any part of the burden of desegregating inner-city schools, thereby reinforcing white flight from cities to suburbs.
By the same token, the decision distilled all the problems of desegregation into the least prosperous districts, often pitting the poorest, most disadvantaged elements of the white and black communities against one another.
Boston and other cities were shaken to their foundations by attempts to implement school-desegregation plans under these painful conditions.
Affirmative action programs also remained highly controversial.
White workers who were denied advancement and white students who were refused college admission continued to raise the cry of reverse discrimination.
They charged that their rights had been violated by employers and admissions officers who put more weight on racial or ethnic background than on ability or achievement.
One white Californian, Allan Bakke, made headlines in 1978 when the Supreme Court, by the narrowest of margins (five to four) upheld his claim that his application to medical school had been turned down because of an admissions program that partially favored minority applicants.
In a tortured deciC HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 sion, reflecting the troubling moral ambiguities and insoluble political complexities of this issue, the Court ordered the University of California at Davis medical school to admit Bakke, and declared that preference in admissions could not be given to members of any group, minority or majority, on the basis of ethnic or racial identity alone.
Yet at the same time, the Court said that racial factors might be taken into account in a schools overall admissions policy.
Among the dissenters on the sharply divided bench was the Courts only black justice, Thurgood Marshall.
He warned in an impassioned opinion that the denial of racial preferences might sweep away years of progress by the civil rights movement.
But many conservatives cheered the decision as affirming the principle that justice is colorblind.
One of the most remarkable developments of the 1970s was the resurgence of Native American political power.
Inspired by the civil rights movement, American Indians learned to use the courts and well-planned acts of civil disobedience to advance their aims.
But while blacks had fought against segregation, Indians used the tactics of the civil rights movement to assert their status as separate semisovereign peoples.
Indian activists captured the nations attention by seizing the island of Alcatraz in 1970 and the village of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1972.
A series of victories in the courts consolidated the decades gains.
In the case of   Court declared that Indian tribes possessed a unique and limited sovereignty, subject to the will of Congress but not to individual states.
Americas two-hundredth birthday, in 1976, fell  during a presidential election yeara fitting coincidence for a proud democracy.
Gerald Ford energetically sought nomination for the presidency in his own right and won the Republican nod at the Kansas City convention.
The Democratic standard-bearer was fifty-oneyear-old James Earl Carter, Jr., a dark-horse candidate who galloped out of obscurity during the long primary-election season.
Carter, a peanut farmer from Plains, Georgia, had served as his states governor from 1971 to 1975.
Flashing a toothy smile and insisting on humble Jimmy as his first name, this born-again Baptist touched many people with his down-home sincerity.
He ran against the memory of Nixon and Watergate as much as he ran against Ford.
His most effective campaign pitch was his promise that Ill never lie to you.
Untainted by ties with a corrupt and cynical Washington, he attracted voters as an outsider who would clean the disorderly house of big government.
well-to-do housewife and mother of seven, Elizabeth Cady Stanton (18151902) was an unlikely revolutionary.
Yet this founding mother of American feminism devoted seven decades of her life to the fight for womens rights.
Young Elizabeth Cady drew her inspiration from the fight against slavery.
In 1840 she married fellow abolitionist Henry Stanton.
Honeymooning in London, they attended the World Anti-Slavery Convention, where women were forced to sit in a screened-off balcony above the convention floor.
This insult awakened Stanton to the cause that would occupy her life.
With Lucretia Mott and other female abolitionists, Stanton went on to organize the Seneca Falls Convention in 1848.
There she presented her Declaration of Sentiments, modeled on the Declaration of Independence and proclaiming that all men  demanded for women the right to own property, to enter the professions, and, most daring of all, to vote.
As visionaries of a radically different future for women, early feminists encountered a mountain of hostility and tasted bitter disappointment.
Stanton failed in her struggle to have women included in the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, which granted African-Americans equal citizenship.
She died before seeing her dream of woman suffrage realized in the Nineteenth Amendment (1920).
Yet by imagining womens emancipation as an expansion of Americas founding principles of citizenship, Stanton charted a path that other feminists would follow a century later.
Historians use the terms first wave and second wave to distinguish the womens movement of the nineteenth century from that of the late twentieth century.
The woman most often credited with launching the second wave is Betty Friedan (b.
1921).
Growing up in Peoria, Illinois, Friedan had seen her mother grow bitter over sacrificing a journalism career to raise her family.
Friedan, a suburban housewife, went on to write the 1963 best-seller tion of millions of housewives trapped in the comfortable concentration camp of the suburban home.
The book struck a resonant chord and catapulted its author onto the national stage.
In 1966 Friedan cofounded the National Organization for Women (NOW), the chief political arm of secondwave feminism.
Just as first-wave feminism grew out of abolitionism, the second wave drew ideas, leaders, and tactics from the civil rights movement of the 1960s.
Civil rights workers and feminists alike focused on equal rights.
NOW campaigned vigorously for an Equal Rights Amendment that in 1982 fell just three states short of ratification.
Second-wave feminism also had an avowedly radical wing, supported by younger women who were eager to challenge almost every traditional male and female gender role and to take the feminist cause to the streets.
Among these women was Robin Morgan (b.
1941).
As a college student in the 1960s, Morgan was active in civil rights organizations like the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC).
Civil rights activism provided Morgan with a model for crusading against social injustice.
It also exposed her to the same sexism that plagued society at large.
Women in the movement who protested against gender discrimination met ridicule, as in SNCC leader Stokely Carmichaels famous retort, The only position for women in SNCC is prone.
Morgan went on to found WITCH (Womens International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell), made famous by its protest at the 1968 Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
There demonstrators crowned a sheep Miss America and threw symbols of womens oppression bras, girdles, dishclothsinto trash cans.
(Contrary to news stories, they did not burn the bras.
) As the contrast between WITCH and NOW suggests, second-wave feminism was a remarkably diverse movement.
Feminists in the late twentieth century disagreed over many issuesfrom pornography and marriage to how much to expect from government, capitalism, and men.
Some feminists placed a priority on gender equality, for example, full female service in the military.
Others defended a feminism of gender differencesuch as maternity leaves and other special protections for women in the workplace.
Still, beyond these differences feminists had much in common.
Most advocated a womans right to choose in the battle over abortion rights.
Most regarded the law as the key weapon against gender discrimination.
By centurys end radical and moderate feminists alike could take pride in a host of achievements that had changed the landscape of gender relations beyond what most people could have imagined at midcentury.
Yet, like Elizabeth Cady Stanton, second-wave feminists also shared the burden of understanding that the goals of genuine equality would take more than a lifetime to achieve.
Carter squeezed out a narrow victory on election day, with 51 percent of the popular vote.
The electoral count stood at 297 to 240.
The winner swept every state except Virginia in his native South.
Especially important were the votes of AfricanAmericans, 97 percent of whom cast their ballots for Carter.
Carter enjoyed hefty Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress.
Hopes ran high that the stalemate of the Nixon-Ford years between a Republican White House and a Democratic Capitol Hill would now be ended.
At first Carter enjoyed notable political success.
Congress granted his request to create a new cabinet-level Department of Energy.
Calling the American tax system a disgrace to the human race, Carter also proposed tax reform and reduction.
Congress eventually obliged him, in part, with an $18 billion tax cut in 1978.
The new presidents popularity remained exceptionally high during his first few months in office, even when he courted public disfavor by courageously keeping his campaign promise to pardon some ten thousand draft evaders of the Vietnam War era.
But Carters honeymoon did not last long.
An inexperienced outsider, he had campaigned against the Washington establishment and never quite made the transition to being an insider himself.
He repeatedly rubbed congressional fur the wrong way, especially by failing to consult adequately with the leaders.
Critics charged that he isolated himself in a shallow pool of fellow Georgians, whose ignorance of the ways of Washington compounded the problems of their greenhorn chief.
As a committed Christian, President Carter displayed from the outset an overriding concern for human rights as the guiding principle of his foreign policy.
In the African nations of Rhodesia (later Zimbabwe) and South Africa, Carter and his eloquent U.N.
ambassador, Andrew Young, championed the oppressed black majority.
The presidents most spectacular foreign-policy achievement came in September 1978 at Camp David, the woodsy presidential retreat in the Maryland highlands.
Relations between Egypt and Israel had deteriorated so far that another blowup in the misery-drenched Middle East seemed imminent.
So grave was the danger that Carter courageously risked humiliating failure by inviting President C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel to a summit conference at Camp David.
Skillfully serving as go-between, Carter after thirteen days persuaded the two visitors to sign an accord (September 17, 1978) that held considerable promise of peace.
Israel agreed in principle to withdraw from territory conquered in the 1967 war, and Egypt in return promised to respect Israels borders.
Both parties pledged themselves to sign a formal peace treaty within three months.
The president crowned this diplomatic success by resuming full diplomatic relations with China in early 1979 after a nearly thirty-year interruption.
Carter also successfully proposed two treaties turning over complete ownership and control of the Panama Canal to the Panamanians by the year 2000.
Despite these dramatic accomplishments, trouble stalked Carters foreign policy.
Overshadowing all international issues was the ominous reheating of the Cold War with the Soviet Union.
Dtente fell into disrepute as thousands of Cuban troops, assisted by Soviet advisers, appeared in Angola, Ethiopia, and elsewhere in Africa to support revolutionary factions.
Arms control negotiations with Moscow stalled in the face of this Soviet military meddling.
Adding to Carters mushrooming troubles was the failing health of the economy.
Prices had been rising feverishly, increasing at a rate of more than 10 percent a year by 1974 (double-digit inflation).
Crippling oil-price hikes from OPEC in that same year dealt the reeling economy another body blow.
A stinging recession during Gerald Fords presidency brought the inflation rate down temporarily, but virtually from the moment of Carters inauguration, prices resumed their dizzying ascent, driving the inflation rate well above 13 percent by 1979.
The soaring bill for imported oil plunged Americas balance of payments deeply into the red (an unprecedented $40 billion in 1978), as Americans paid more for foreign products than they were able to earn from selling their own goods overseas.
The oil shocks of the 1970s taught Americans a painful but necessary lesson: that they could never again seriously consider a policy of economic isolation, as they had tried to do in the decades between the two world wars.
For most of its history, Americas foreign trade had accounted for no more than 10 percent of gross national product (GNP).
But huge foreign-oil bills drove that figure steadily upward in the 1970s and thereafter.
By the centurys end, some 27 percent of GNP depended on foreign trade.
The nations new economic interdependence meant that the United States could not dominate international trade and finance as easily as it had in the post World War II decades.
Americans, once happily insulated behind their ocean moats, would have to master foreign languages and study foreign cultures if they wanted to prosper in the rapidly globalizing economy.
Yawning deficits in the federal budget, reaching nearly $60 billion in 1980, further aggravated the U.S.
ecomonys inflationary ailments.
Americans living on fixed incomesmostly elderly people or workers without a strong union to go to bat for themsuffered from the shrinking dollar.
People with money to lend pushed interest rates ever higher, hoping to protect themselves from being repaid in badly depreciated dollars.
The prime rate (the rate of interest that banks charge their very best customers) vaulted to an unheard-of 20 percent in early 1980.
The high cost of borrowing money shoved small businesses to the wall and strangled the construction industry, heavily dependent on loans to finance new housing and other projects.
From the outset Carter diagnosed Americas  economic disease as stemming primarily from the nations costly dependence on foreign oil.
Accordingly, one of the first acts of his presidency was a dramatic appeal to embark on an energy crusade that he called the moral equivalent of war.
The president called for legislation to improve energy conservation, especially by curtailing the manufacture of large, gasguzzling automobiles.
But these proposals, in April 1977, ignited a blaze of indifference among the American people, who had already forgotten the long gasoline lines of 1973.
Public apathy and congressional hostility smothered President Carters hopes of quickly initiating an energetic energy program.
Events in Iran jolted Americans out of their complacency about energy supplies in 1979.
The imperious Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, installed as shah of Iran with help from Americas CIA in 1953, had long ruled his oil-rich land with a will of steel.
His repressive regime was finally overthrown in  January 1979.
Violent revolution was spearheaded in Iran by Muslim fundamentalists who fiercely resented the shahs campaign to westernize and secularize his country.
Denouncing the United States as the Great Satan that had abetted the shahs efforts, these extremists engulfed Iran in chaos in the wake of his departure.
The crippling upheavals soon spread to Irans oil fields.
As Iranian oil stopped flowing into the stream of world commerce, shortages appeared, and OPEC again seized the opportunity to hike petroleum prices.
Americans once more found themselves waiting impatiently in long lines at gas stations or buying gasoline only on specified days.
C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 Annual percentage change, all items  (right scale) Average price of consumer goods (CPI ) 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 Consumer Price Index (1982  1984=100) Annual Percentage Change 1967    1969     1971    1973    1975    1977    1979     1981    1983    1985    1987    1989     1991    1993    1995 1997 1999 2000 The History of the Consumer Price Index, 19672000 This graph shows both the annual percentage of inflation and the cumulative shrinkage in the dollars value since 1967.
(By 2000, it took more than five dollars to buy what one dollar purchased in 1967.
) (Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics and  , relevant years.
) As the oil crisis deepened, President Carter sensed the rising temperature of popular discontent.
In July 1979 he retreated to the presidential mountain hideaway at Camp David, where he remained largely out of public view for ten days.
Like a royal potentate of old, summoning the wise men of the realm for their counsel in a time of crisis, Carter called in over a hundred leaders from all walks of life to give him their views.
Meanwhile, the nation waited anxiously for the results of these extraordinary deliberations.
Carter came down from the mountaintop on July 15, 1979.
He revealed his thoughts to the American people in a remarkable television address, which amounted to a kind of old-fashioned jeremiad.
He chided his fellow citizens for falling into a moral and spiritual crisis and for being too concerned with material goods.
While Carters address stunned and even perplexed the nation, he let drop another shoe a few days later.
In a bureaucratic massacre of almost unprecedented proportions, he fired four cabinet secretaries.
At the same time, he circled the wagons of his Georgian advisers more tightly about the White House by reorganizing and expanding the power of his personal staff.
Critics began to wonder aloud whether Carter, the professed man of the people, was losing touch with the popular mood of the country.
Hopes for a less dangerous world rose slightly in June 1979, when President Carter met with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev in Vienna to sign the longstalled SALT II agreements, limiting the levels of In a nation that was proud of hard work, strong families, close-knit communities, and our faith in God, too many of us now tend to worship self-indulgence and consumption.
Human identity is no longer defined by what one does, but by what one owns.
But weve discovered that owning things and consuming things does not satisfy our longing for meaning.
Weve learned that piling up material goods cannot fill the emptiness of lives which have no confidence or purpose.
The symptoms of this crisis of the American spirit are all around us.
lethal strategic weapons in the Soviet and American arsenals.
But conservative critics of the presidents defense policies, still deeply suspicious of the Soviet Union, which they regarded as the Wicked Witch of the East, unsheathed their long knives to carve up the SALT II treaty when it came to the Senate for debate in the summer of 1979.
Their hand was strengthened when news reports broke that a Soviet combat brigade was stationed in Castros Cuba.
Political earthquakes in the petroleum-rich Persian Gulf region finally buried all hopes of ratifying the SALT II treaty.
On November 4, 1979, a howling mob of rabidly anti-American Muslim militants stormed the United States embassy in Teheran, Iran, and took all of its occupants hostage.
The captors then demanded that the American authorities ship back to Iran the exiled shah, who had arrived in the United States two weeks earlier for medical treatment.
The shaky Iranian government, barely visible through the smoke of revolution and religious upheaval then rocking the country, refused to intervene against the militants.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the white-bearded Muslim holy man who inspired the revolutionaries, even accused the United States of masterminding an attack on the sacred Muslim city of Mecca, in Saudi Arabia.
World opinion hotly condemned the diplomatic felony in Iran, while Americans agonized over both the fate of the hostages and the stability of the entire Persian Gulf region, so dangerously close to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet army then aroused the Wests worst fears on December 27, 1979, when it blitzed into the mountainous nation of Afghanistan, next door to Iran, and appeared to be poised for a thrust at the oil-jugular of the gulf.
President Carter reacted vigorously to these alarming events.
He slapped an embargo on the export of grain and high-technology machinery to the USSR and called for a boycott of the upcoming Olympic Games in Moscow.
He proposed the creation of a Rapid Deployment Force to respond to suddenly developing crises in faraway places and requested that young people (including women) be made to register for a possible military draft.
The president proclaimed that the United States would use any means necessary, including force, to protect the Persian Gulf against Soviet incursions.
He grimly conceded that he had misjudged the Soviets, C HAPTER 40 The Stalemated Seventies, 19681980 and the SALT II treaty became a dead letter in the Senate.
Meanwhile, the Soviet army met unexpectedly stiff resistance in Afghanistan and bogged down in a nasty, decade-long guerrilla war that came to be called Russias Vietnam.
But though the Soviets were stalled in Afghanistan, the crisis in Iran ground on.
The Iranian hostage episode was Cartersand Americasbed of nails.
The captured Americans languished in cruel captivity, while the nightly television news broadcasts in the United States showed humiliating scenes of Iranian mobs burning the American flag and spitting on effigies of Uncle Sam.
Carter at first tried to apply economic sanctions and the pressure of world public opinion against the Iranians, while waiting for the emergence of a stable government with which to negotiate.
But the political turmoil in Iran rumbled on endlessly, and the presidents frustration grew.
Carter at last ordered a daring rescue mission.
A highly trained commando team penetrated deep into Irans sandy interior.
Their plan required ticktock-perfect timing to succeed, and when equipment failures prevented some members of the team from reaching their destination, the mission had to be scrapped.
As the commandos withdrew in the dark desert night, two of their aircraft collided, killing eight of the would-be rescuers.
This disastrous failure of the rescue raid proved anguishing for Americans.
The episode seemed to underscore the nations helplessness and even incompetence in the face of a mortifying insult to the national honor.
The stalemate with Iran dragged on throughout the rest of Carters term, providing an embarrassing backdrop to the embattled presidents struggle for reelection.
Nixon orders invasion of Cambodia Kent State and Jackson State incidents Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  created Clean Air Act Pentagon Papers published Twenty-sixth Amendment (lowering voting age  to eighteen) passed  Nixon visits China and the Soviet Union ABM and SALT I treaties ratified Nixon defeats McGovern for presidency Equal Rights Amendment passes Congress Title IX of Education Amendments passed Vietnam cease-fire and U.S.
withdrawal Agnew resigns; Ford appointed  vice president War Powers Act Arab-Israeli war and Arab oil embargo Endangered Species Act Watergate hearings and investigations Nixon resigns; Ford assumes presidency First OPEC oil-price increase International Energy Agency formed Helsinki accords South Vietnam falls to communists Carter defeats Ford for presidency Egyptian-Israeli Camp David agreement Iranian revolution and oil crisis SALT II agreements signed (never ratified by  Senate) Soviet Union invades Afghanistan Iranian hostage crisis For further reading, see page A27 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  The Resurgence of Conservatism  19802000 R ONALD R EAGAN , I NAUGURAL , 1981 I ts morning in America was the slogan of Republican candidate Ronald Reagan in his 1980 presidential campaign.
Certainly the 1980s were a new day for Americas conservative right.
Census figures confirmed that the average American was older than in the stormy sixties and much more likely to live in the South or West, the traditional bastions of the Old Right, where many residents harbored suspicions of federal power.
The conservative cause drew added strength from the emergence of a New Right movement, partly in response to the countercultural protests of the 1960s.
Spearheading the New Right were evangelical Christian groups such as the Moral Majority, dedicated believers who enjoyed startling success as political fund-raisers and organizers.
Many New Right activists were far less agitated about economic questions than about cultural con The Declaration of Independence mentions the Supreme Being no less than four times.
In God We Trust is engraved on our coinage.
The Supreme Court opens its proceedings with a religious invocation.
And the Members of Congress open their sessions with a prayer.
I just happen to believe the schoolchildren of the United States are entitled  to the same privileges as Supreme Court Justices and Congressmen.
cernsthe so-called social issues.
They denounced abortion, pornography, homosexuality, feminism, and especially affirmative action.
They championed prayer in the schools and tougher penalties for criminals.
Together, the Old and New Right added up to a powerful political combination, devoted to changing the very character of American society.
Ronald Reagan was well suited to lead the gathering conservative crusade.
Reared in a generation whose values were formed well before the upheavals of the 1960s, he naturally sided with the new right on social issues.
In economic and social matters alike, he denounced the activist government and failed social engineering of the 1960s.
He skillfully mobilized political resentments in a manner reminiscent of his early political hero, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Both Roosevelt and Reagan championed the common man against vast impersonal menaces that overshadowed the individual.
But where the Democratic Roosevelt had branded big business the foe  of the forgotten man, the Republican Reagan depicted big government as the archvillain.
He preached a populist political philosophy that condemned federal intervention in local affairs, favoritism for minorities, and the elitism of arrogant bureaucrats.
He aimed especially to win over from the Democratic column working-class and lowermiddle-class white voters by implying that the Democratic party had become the exclusive tool of its minority constituents.
Though Reagan was no intellectual, he drew on the ideas of a small but influential group of thinkers known as neoconservatives.
Their ranks included Norman Podhoretz, editor of  zine, and Irving Kristol, editor of  Reacting against what they saw as the excesses of 1960s liberalism, the neoconservatives championed free-market capitalism liberated from government restraints, and they took tough, harshly anti-Soviet positions in foreign policy.
They also questioned liberal welfare programs and affirmative-action policies and called for reassertion of traditional values of individualism and the centrality of the family.
An actor-turned-politician, Reagan enjoyed enormous popularity with his crooked grin and awshucks manner.
The son of a neer-do-well, impoverished Irish-American father with a fondness for the bottle, he had grown up in a small Illinois town.
Reagan got his start in life in the depressed 1930s as a sports announcer for an Iowa radio station.
Good looks and a way with words landed him acting jobs in Hollywood, where he became a B-grade star in the 1940s.
He displayed a flair for politics as president of the Screen Actors Guild in the McCarthy era of the early 1950s, when he helped purge communists and other suspected reds from the film industry.
In 1954 he became a spokesman for the General Electric Corporation at a salary of some $150,000 per year.
In that position he began to abandon his New Dealish political views and increasingly to preach a conservative, antigovernment line.
Reagans huge visibility and growing skill at promoting the conservative cause made him attractive to a group of wealthy California businessmen, who helped launch his political career as governor of California from 1966 to 1974.
By 1980 the Republican party was ready to challenge the Democrats hold on the White House.
Bedeviled abroad and becalmed at home, Jimmy Carters administration struck many Americans as bungling and befuddled.
Carters inability to control double-digit inflation was especially damaging.
Frustrated critics bellyached loudly about the Georgians alleged mismanagement of the nations affairs.
Disaffection with Carters apparent ineptitude ran deep even in his own Democratic party, where an ABC (Anybody but Carter) movement gathered steam.
The liberal wing of the party found its champion in Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, the last survivor of the assassin-plagued Kennedy brothers.
He and Carter slugged it out in a series of bruising primary elections, while delighted Republicans decorously proceeded to name Reagan their presidential nominee.
In the end Kennedys candidacy fell victim to the countrys conservative mood and to lingering suspicions about a 1969 automobile accident on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts, in which a young woman assistant was drowned when Kennedys car plunged off a bridge.
A badly battered Carter, his party divided and in disarray, was left to do battle with Reagan.
The Republican candidate proved to be a formidable campaigner.
He used his professional acting skills to great advantage in a televised debate with the colorless Carter.
Reagan attacked the incumbents fumbling performance in foreign policy and blasted the big-government philosophy of the Democratic party (a philosophy that Carter did not fully embrace).
Galloping inflation, sky-high interest rates, and a faltering economy also put the incumbent president on the defensive.
Carter countered ineffectively with charges that Reagan was a triggerhappy cold warrior who might push the country into nuclear war.
Carters spotty record in office was no defense against Reagans popular appeal.
On election day the Republican rang up a spectacular victory, bagging over 51 percent of the popular vote, while 41 percent went to Carter and 7 percent to moderate independent candidate John Anderson.
The electoral count stood at 489 for Reagan and 49 for Carter.
(Anderson failed to gain a single electoral vote.
) Carter managed to win only six states and the District of Columbia, a defeat almost as crushing as George McGoverns loss to Richard Nixon in 1972.
He was the first elected president to be unseated by the voters since Herbert Hoover was ejected from office in 1932.
Equally startling, the Republicans gained control of the Senate for the first time in twenty-five years.
Leading Democratic liberals who C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 ReaganRepublican CarterDemocratic AndersonIndependent WASH.
9 ORE.
6 CALIF.
45 NEV.
3 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 4 WYO.
3 UTAH 4 COLO.
7 ARIZ.
6 ALASKA 3 S.D.
4 KANSAS 7 OKLA.
8 MICH.
21 N.Y.
41 N.D.
3 MINN.
10 IOWA 8 NEBR.
5 MO.
12 ARK.
6 LA.
10 TEXAS 26 N.M.
4 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
12 FLA.
17 TENN.
10 N.C.
13 S.C.
8 VA.
12 W. VA.
6 D.C.
3 PA.
27 OHIO 25 IND.
13 ILL.
26 WISC.
11 KY.
10 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
14 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
17 DEL.
3 HAWAII 4 MD.
10 489 49 0 90.9% 9.1% 0.0% 43,899,248 35,481,435 5,719,427 50.8% 41.0% 6.6% Presidential Election of 1980 (with electoral vote by state) This map graphically displays Reagans landslide victory over both Carter and Anderson.
had been targeted for defeat by well-heeled newright groups went down like dead timber in the conservative windstorm that swept the country.
Carter showed dignity in defeat, delivering a thoughtful Farewell Address that stressed his efforts to scale down the deadly arms race, to promote human rights, and to protect the environment.
In one of his last acts in office, he signed a bill preserving some 100 million acres of Alaska land for national parks, forests, and wildlife refuges.
An unusually intelligent, articulate, and well-meaning president, he had been hampered by his lack of managerial talent and had been badly buffeted by events beyond his control, such as the soaring price of oil, runaway inflation, and the galling insult of the continuing hostage crisis in Iran.
If Carter was correct in believing that the country was suffering from a terrible malaise, he never found the right medicine to cure the disease.
Reagans arrival in Washington was triumphal.
The Iranians contributed to the festive mood by releasing the hostages on Reagans Inauguration Day, January 20, 1981, after 444 days of captivity.
Reagan assembled a conservative cabinet of the best and the rightest and relied on these and other advisers to make important decisions.
The cabinet included a highly controversial Coloradan, James Watt, as secretary of the interior.
Watt was a product of the Sagebrush Rebellion, a fiercely antiWashington movement that had sprung up to protest federal control over the rich mineral and timber resources in the western states.
Environmentalists howled loudly about Watts schemes to hobble the Environmental Protection Agency and to permit oil drilling in scenic places.
After bitter protests they succeeded in halting Watts plan to allow oil exploration off the California coastline.
Watt blithely rebuffed critics by saying, I make lots of mistakes because I make lots of decisions.
He made one mistake too many in 1983, when he thoughtlessly told an offensive ethnic joke in public and was forced to resign.
The new president, a hale and hearty sixty-nineyear-old, was devoted to fiscal fitness.
A major goal of Reagans political career was to reduce the size  of the government by shrinking the federal budget and slashing taxes.
He declared, Government is not the solution to our problem.
Government is the problem.
Years of New Dealstyle tax-and-spend programs, Reagan jested, had created a federal government that reminded him of the definition of a baby as a creature who was all appetite at one end, with no sense of responsibility at the other.
By the early 1980s, this antigovernment message found a receptive audience.
In the two decades since 1960, federal spending had risen from about 18 percent of gross national product to nearly 23 percent.
At the same time, the composition of the federal budget had been shifting from defense to entitlement programs, including Social Security and Medicare (see chart p.
1033).
In 1973 the budget of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare surpassed that of the Department of Defense.
Citizens increasingly balked at paying the bills for further extension of government benefits.
After four decades of advancing New Deal and Great Society programs, a strong countercurrent took hold.
Californians staged a tax revolt in 1978 (known by its official ballot title of Proposition 13) that slashed property taxes and forced painful cuts in government services.
The California tax quake jolted other state capitals and even rocked the pillars of Congress in faraway Washington, D.C.
Ronald Reagan had ridden this political shock wave to presidential victory in 1980 and now proceeded to rattle the welfare state to its very foundations.
With near-religious zeal and remarkable effectiveness, Reagan set out to persuade Congress to legislate his smaller-government policies into law.
He proposed a new federal budget that necessitated cuts of some $35 billion, mostly in social programs like food stamps and federally funded job-training centers.
Reagan worked naturally in harness with the Republican majority in the Senate, but to get his way in the Democratic House, he undertook some old-fashioned politicking.
He enterprisingly wooed a group of mostly southern conservative Democrats (dubbed boll weevils), who abandoned their own partys leadership to follow the president.
Then on March 6, 1981, a deranged gunman shot the president as he was leaving a Washington hotel.
A .22-caliber bullet penetrated beneath Reagans left arm and collapsed his left lung.
With admirable courage and grace, and with impressive physical resilience for a man his age, Reagan seemed to recover rapidly from his violent ordeal.
Twelve days after the attack, he walked out of the hospital and returned to work.
When he appeared a few days later on national television to address the Congress and the public on his budget, the outpouring of sympathy and support was enormous.
Swept along on a tide of presidential popularity, Congress swallowed Reagans budget proposals, approving expenditures of some $695 billion, with a projected deficit of about $38 billion.
To hit those financial targets, drastic surgery was required, and Congress plunged its scalpel deeply into Great Societyspawned social programs.
Wounded Democrats wondered if the presidents intention was to cut the budget or to gut the budget.
Reagans triumph amazed political observers, especially defeated Democrats.
The new president had descended upon Washington like an avenging angel of conservatism, kicking up a blinding whirlwind of political change.
He sought nothing less than the dismantling of the welfare state and the reversal of the political evolution of the preceding half-century.
His impressive performance demonstrated the power of the presidency with a skill not seen since Lyndon Johnsons day.
Out the window went the textbooks that had concluded, largely on the basis of the stalemated 1970s, that this office had been eclipsed by a powerful, uncontrollable Congress.
C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 Reagan hardly rested to savor the sweetness of his victory.
The second part of his economic program called for deep tax cuts, amounting to 25 percent across-the-board reductions over a period of three years.
Once again, Reagan displayed his skill as a performer and a persuader in a highly effective television address in July 1981, when he pleaded  for congressional passage of the tax-cut bill.
Democrats, he quipped, had never met a tax they didnt hike.
Thanks largely to the continued defection of the boll weevils from the Democratic camp, the president again had his way.
In August 1981 Congress approved a set of far-reaching tax reforms that lowered individual tax rates, reduced federal estate taxes, and created new tax-free savings plans for small investors.
Reagans supply-side economic advisers assured him that the combination of budgetary discipline and tax reduction would stimulate new investment, boost productivity, foster dramatic economic growth, and reduce the federal deficit.
But at first supply-side economics seemed to be a beautiful theory mugged by a gang of brutal facts, as the economy slid into its deepest recession since the 1930s.
Unemployment reached nearly 11 percent in 1982, businesses folded, and several bank failures jolted the nations entire financial system.
The automobile industry, once the brightest jewel in Americas industrial crown, turned in its dimmest performance in history.
Battling against Japanese imports, major automakers reported losses in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
Fuming and frustrated Democrats angrily charged that the presidents budget cuts slashed especially cruelly at the poor and the handicapped and that his tax cuts favored the well-to-do.
They accused Reagan of trying to make those Americans with the frailest shoulders carry the heaviest burden in the fight for fiscal reform.
In fact, the anti-inflationary tight money policies that precipitated the Reagan recession of 1982 had been initiated by the Federal Reserve Board in 1979, on Carters watch.
Ignoring the yawping pack of Democratic critics, President Reagan and his economic advisers serenely waited for their supply-side economic policies (Reaganomics) to produce the promised results.
The supply-siders seemed to be vindicated when a healthy economic recovery finally got under way in 1983.
Yet the economy of the 1980s was not uniformly sound.
For the first time in the twentieth century, income gaps widened between the richest and the poorest Americans.
The poor got poorer and the very rich grew fabulously richer, while middleclass incomes largely stagnated.
Symbolic of the new income stratification was the emergence of yuppies, or young, urban professionals.
Sporting Rolex watches and BMW sports cars, they made a nearreligion out of conspicuous consumption.
Though numbering only about 1.5 million people and being something of a stereotype, yuppies showcased the values of materialism and the pursuit of wealth that came to symbolize the high-rolling 1980s.
Some economists located the sources of the economic upturn neither in the presidents budget cuts and tax reforms nor in the go-get-em avarice of the yuppies.
It was massive military expenditures, they argued, that constituted the real foundation of 1980s prosperity.
Reagan cascaded nearly 2 trillion budget dollars onto the Pentagon in the 1980s, asserting  the need to close a window of vulnerability in the armaments race with the Soviet Union.
Ironically, this conservative president thereby plunged the government into a red-ink bath of deficit spending that made the New Deal look downright stingy.
Federal budget deficits topped $100 billion in 1982, and the governments books were nearly $200 billion out of balance in every subsequent year of the 1980s.
Massive government borrowing to cover those deficits kept interest rates high, and high interest rates in turn elevated the value of the dollar to record altitudes in the international money markets.
The soaring dollar was good news for American tourists and buyers of foreign cars, but it dealt crippling blows to American exporters, as the American international trade deficit reached a record $152 billion in 1987.
The masters of international commerce and finance for a generation after World War II, Americans suddenly became the worlds heaviest borrowers in the global economy of the 1980s.
Hard as nails toward the Soviet Union in his campaign speeches, Reagan saw no reason to soften up after he checked in at the White House.
As the Soviets carried on their war in Afghanistan, Reagan continued to condemn the Kremlin.
In one of his first presidential news conferences, he claimed that the Soviets were prepared to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, in pursuit of their goals of world conquest.
In a later speech, he characterized the Soviet Union as the focus of evil in the modern world.
Reagan believed in negotiating with the Sovietsbut only from a position of overwhelming strength.
Accordingly, his strategy for dealing with Moscow was simple: by enormously expanding U.S.
military capabilities, he could threaten the Soviets with a fantastically expensive new round of the arms race.
The American economy, theoretically, could better bear this new financial burden than could the creaking Soviet system.
Desperate to avoid economic ruin, Kremlin leaders would come to the bargaining table and sing Reagans tune.
This strategy resembled a riverboat gamblers ploy.
It wagered the enormous sum of Reagans defense budgets on the hope that the other side would not call Washingtons bluff and initiate a new cycle of arms competition.
Reagan played his  trump card in this risky game in March 1983, when he announced his intention to pursue a high-technology missile-defense system called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly known as Star Wars.
The plan called for orbiting battle stations in space that could fire laser beams or other forms of concentrated energy to vaporize intercontinental missiles on liftoff.
Reagan described SDI as offering potential salvation from the nuclear nightmare by throwing an astrodome defense shield over American cities.
Most scientists considered this an impossible goal.
But the deeper logic of SDI lay in its fit with Reagans overall Soviet strategy.
By pitching the arms contest onto a stratospheric plane of high technology and astronomical expense, it would further force the Kremlins hand.
By emphasizing defense rather than offense, SDI upset four decades of strategic thinking about nuclear weaponry.
Many experts remained deeply skeptical about the plan.
Those who did not dismiss it as ludicrous feared that Star Wars research might be ruinously costly, ultimately unworkable, and fatally destabilizing to the distasteful but effective balance of terror that had kept the nuclear peace since World War II.
Scientific and strategic doubts combined to constrain congressional funding for SDI through the remainder of Reagans term.
Relations with the Soviets further nose-dived in late 1981, when the government of Poland, needled for over a year by a popular movement of workingpeople organized into a massive union called Solidarity, clamped martial law on the troubled country.
Reagan saw the heavy fist of the Kremlin inside this Polish iron glove, and he imposed economic sanctions on Poland and the USSR alike.
Notably absent from the mandated measures was a resumption of the grain embargo, which would have pinched the pocketbooks of too many American farmers.
Dealing with the Soviet Union was additionally complicated by the inertia and ill health of the aging oligarchs in the Kremlin, three of whom were swept away by death between late 1982 and early 1985.
Relations grew even more tense when the Soviets,  in September 1983, blasted from the skies a Korean passenger airliner that had inexplicably violated Soviet airspace.
Hundreds of civilians, including many Americans, plummeted to their deaths in the frigid Sea of Okhotsk.
By the end of 1983, all armscontrol negotiations with the Soviets were broken off.
The deepening chill of the Cold War was further felt in 1984, when, in response to the Western boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics, USSR and Soviet-bloc athletes boycotted the Los Angeles Olympic Games.
The volatile Middle Eastern pot continued to boil ominously.
Israel badly strained its bonds of friendship with the United States by continuing to allow new settlements to be established in the occupied territory of the Jordan Rivers West Bank.
Israel further raised the stakes in the Middle East in June 1982 C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 when it invaded neighboring Lebanon, seeking to suppress once and for all the guerrilla bases from which Palestinian fighters harassed beleaguered Israel.
The Palestinians were bloodily subdued, but Lebanon, already pulverized by years of episodic civil war, was plunged into armed chaos.
President Reagan was obliged to send American troops to Lebanon in 1983 as part of an international peacekeeping force, but their presence did not bring peace.
A suicide bomber crashed an explosivesladen truck into a United States Marine barracks on October 23, 1983, killing more than two hundred marines.
President Reagan soon thereafter withdrew the remaining American troops, while miraculously Mecca Tehran I R A N I R A Q S A U D I A R A B I A R U S S I A I N D I A SYRIA JORDAN ISRAEL TURKEY E G Y P T L I B Y A SUDAN S O M A L I A E T H I O P I A O M A N Y E M E N UNITED ARAB EMIRATES LEBANON CYPRUS CRETE QATAR BAHRAIN KUWAIT DJIBOUTI ERITREA AFGHANISTAN TURKMENISTAN PAKISTAN GREECE AZERBAIJAN TAJIKISTAN UZBEKISTAN GEORGIA ARMENIA SEE INSET Oil fields   Areas occupied by Israel after wars of 1967 and 1973 Jerusalem WEST BANK GAZA STRIP GOLAN HEIGHTS JORDAN ISRAEL EGYPT SYRIA The Middle East A combination of political instability and precious petroleum resources has made the region from Egypt to Afghanistan an arc of crisis.
Anti-Castro regime elected, 1981.
Sandinista rebels come to power, 1979.
MEXICO GUATEMALA EL   SALVADOR HONDURAS BELIZE NICARAGUA COSTA RICA PANAMA COLOMBIA VENEZUELA CUBA HAITI GRENADA DOMINICAN REP.
PUERTO RICO  (U.S.
) JAMAICA UNITED STATES BAHAMAS U.S.
begins military build-up to support "contra" rebels against Sandinistas in Nicaragua, 1981.
Free elections remove Sandinistas from power, 1990.
U.S.
invasion of Panama, 1989.
Panama  Canal Zone VIRGIN IS.
(U.S.
) U.S.
sends military advisers, 1981; civil war ends, 1992.
Five coups or attempted coups, 19861991, propel thousands of refugees to U.S.
Military coup, 1982.
U.S.
invades, 1983.
U.S.
sends troops, 19941996.
Thousands of refugees head for  U.S., early 1980s.
Central America and the Caribbean This region of historical importance to the United States experienced dramatic political upheavals in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s.
suffering no political damage from this horrifying and humiliating attack.
His mystified Democratic opponents began to call him the Teflon president, to whom nothing hurtful could stick.
Central America, in the United States own backyard, also rumbled menacingly.
A leftist revolution had deposed the long-time dictator of Nicaragua  in 1979.
President Carter had tried to ignore the hotly anti-American rhetoric of the revolutionaries, known as Sandinistas, and to establish good diplomatic relations with them.
But cold warrior Reagan took their rhetoric at face value and hurled back at them some hot language of his own.
He accused the Sandinistas of turning their country into a forward base for Soviet and Cuban military penetration of all of Central America.
Brandishing photographs taken from high-flying spy planes, administration spokespeople claimed that Nicaraguan leftists were shipping weapons to revolutionary forces in tiny El Salvador, torn by violence since a coup in 1979.
Reagan sent military advisers to prop up the pro-American government of El Salvador.
He also provided covert aid, including the CIA-engineered mining of harbors, to the contra rebels opposing the anti-American government of Nicaragua.
Reagan flexed his military muscles elsewhere in the turbulent Caribbean.
In a dramatic display of American might, in October 1983 he dispatched a heavy-firepower invasion force to the island of Grenada, where a military coup had killed the prime minister and brought Marxists to power.
Swiftly overrunning the tiny island and ousting the insurgents, American troops vividly demonstrated Reagans determination to assert the dominance of the United States in the Caribbean, just as Theodore Roosevelt had done.
A confident Ronald Reagan, bolstered by a buoyant economy at home and by the popularity of his muscular posture abroad, handily won the Republican nomination in 1984 for a second White House term.
His opponent was Democrat Walter Mondale, who made history by naming as his vice-presidential running mate Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro of New York.
She was the first woman ever to appear on a major-party presidential ticket.
But even this dramatic gesture could not salvage Mondales candidacy, which was fatally tainted by his service as vice president in the deeply discredited Carter administration.
On election day Reagan walked away with 525 electoral votes to Mondales 13, winning everywhere except in Mondales home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia.
Reagan also overwhelmed Mondale in the popular vote 52,609,797 to 36,450,613.
Shrinking the federal government and reducing taxes had been the main objectives of Reagans first term; foreign-policy issues dominated the news in his second term.
The president soon found himself contending for the worlds attention with a charismatic new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, installed as chairman of the Soviet Communist party in March 1985.
Gorbachev was personable, energetic, imaginative, and committed to radical reforms in the Soviet Union.
He announced two policies with remarkable, even revolutionary, implications.
the secretive, repressive stuffiness of Soviet society by introducing free speech and a measure of political liberty.
intended to revive the moribund Soviet economy by adopting many of the free-market practicessuch as the profit motive and an end to subsidized pricesof the capitalist West.
Both  Soviet Union shrink the size of its enormous military machine and redirect its energies to the dismal civilian economy.
That requirement, in turn, necessitated an end to the Cold War.
Gorbachev accordingly made warm overtures to the West, including an announcement in April 1985 that the Soviet Union would cease to deploy intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) targeted on Western Europe, pending an agreement on their complete elimination.
He pushed this goal when he met with Ronald Reagan at the first of four summit meetings, in Geneva in November 1985.
A second summit meeting, in Reykjavik, Iceland, in October 1986 broke down in a stalemate.
But at a third summit, in Washington, D.C., in December 1987, the two leaders at last signed the INF treaty, banning all intermediaterange nuclear missiles from Europe.
This was a result long sought by both sides; it marked a victory for American policy, for Gorbachevs reform program, and for the peoples of Europe and indeed all the world, who now had at least one less nuclear weapons system to worry about.
Reagan and Gorbachev capped their new friendship in May 1988 at a final summit in Moscow.
There Reagan, who had entered office condemning the evil empire of Soviet communism, warmly C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 praised Gorbachev.
Reagan, the consummate cold warrior, had been flexible and savvy enough to seize a historic opportunity to join with the Soviet chief to bring the Cold War to a kind of conclusion.
For this, history would give both leaders high marks.
Reagan made other decisive moves in foreign policy.
His administration provided strong backing in February 1986 for Corazon Aquinos ouster of dictator Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines.
Reagan ordered a lightning air raid against Libya in 1986, in retaliation for alleged Libyan sponsorship of terrorist attacks, including a bomb blast in a West Berlin discotheque that killed a U.S.
serviceman.
In the summer of 1987, U.S.
naval vessels began escorting oil tankers through the Persian Gulf, inflamed by a long, brutal war between Iran and Iraq.
Two foreign-policy problems seemed insoluble to Reagan: the continuing captivity of a number of American hostages, seized by Muslim extremist groups in bleeding, battered Lebanon; and the continuing grip on power of the left-wing Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
The president repeatedly requested that Congress provide military aid to the contra rebels fighting against the Sandinista regime.
Congress repeatedly refused, and the administration grew increasingly frustrated, even obsessed, in its search for a means to help the contras.
Unknown to the American public, some Washington officials saw a possible linkage between  the two thorny problems of the Middle Eastern hostages and the Central American Sandinistas.
In 1985 American diplomats secretly arranged arms sales to the embattled Iranians in return for Iranian aid in obtaining the release of American hostages held by Middle Eastern terrorists.
At least one hostage was eventually set free.
Meanwhile, money from the payment for the arms was diverted to the contras.
These actions brazenly violated a congressional ban on military aid to the Nicaraguan rebelsnot to mention Reagans repeated vow that he would never negotiate with terrorists.
News of these secret dealings broke in November 1986 and ignited a firestorm of controversy.
President Reagan claimed he was innocent of wrongdoing and ignorant about the activities of his subordinates, but a congressional committee condemned the secrecy, deception, and disdain for  the law displayed by administration officials and concluded that if the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have.
Criminal indictments were later brought against several individuals tarred by the Iran-contra scandal, including marine colonel Oliver North; Norths boss at the National Security Council, Admiral John Poindexter; and even Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger.
North and Poindexter were both found guilty of criminal behavior, though all their convictions were eventually reversed on appeal.
C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 A few months ago I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages.
My heart and my best intentions still tell me that is true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.
DEPRESSION WORLD WAR II BREAKS JAP AN SURRENDERS KOREAN WAR BREAKS VIETNAM WAR CLINTON ELECTED 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 99 6,000 5,500 5,000 4,500 4,000 3,500 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 Billions of dollars 0 REAGAN ELECTED The National Debt, 19301999 World War II provided the first major boost to the national debt.
But it was the policies of the Reagan and Bush administrations, 19811993, that explosively expanded the debt to the $4 trillion level.
By the 1990s, 14 percent of federal revenues went to interest payments on the debt, though the budget surpluses created by the booming economy of the second Clinton administration raised the prospect that the debt might be paid off.
(Sources:  and  relevant years; 1996 and 1997 figures from  Council of Economic Advisors.
) Weinberger received a presidential pardon before he was formally tried.
The Iran-contra affair cast a dark shadow over the Reagan record in foreign policy, tending to obscure the presidents outstanding achievement in establishing a new relationship with the Soviets.
Out of the several Iran-contra investigations, a picture emerged of Reagan as a lazy, perhaps even senile, president who napped through meetings and paid little or no attention to the details of policy.
Reagans critics pounced on this portrait as proof that the  movie-star-turned-politician was a mental lightweight who had merely acted his way through the role of the presidency without really understanding the script.
But despite these damaging revelations, Reagan remained among the most popular and beloved presidents in modern American history.
Ronald Reagan had taken office vowing to invigorate the American economy by rolling back government regulations, lowering taxes, and balancing the budget.
He did ease many regulatory rules, and he pushed major tax reform bills through Congress in 1981 and 1986.
But a balanced budget remained grotesquely out of reach.
Supply-side economic theory had promised that lower taxes would actually so stimulate the economy as a whole.
But in fact the combination of tax reduction and huge increases in military spending opened a vast revenue hole of $200 billion annual deficits.
In his eight years in office, President Reagan added nearly $2 trillion to the national debtmore than all of his predecessors combined, including those who had fought protracted global wars (see the chart on p.
986).
The staggering deficits of the Reagan years assuredly constituted a great economic failure.
And because so much of the Reagan-era debt was financed by foreign lenders, especially the Japanese, the deficits virtually guaranteed that future generations of Americans would either have to work harder than their parents, lower their standard of living, or both, to pay their foreign creditors when the bills came due.
The yawning deficits prompted Congress in 1986 to pass legislation mandating a balanced budget by 1991.
Yet even this drastic measure proved pitifully inadequate to the task of closing the gap between the federal governments income and expenditures, and the national debt continued to grow.
But if the deficits represented an economic failure, they also constituted, strangely enough, a kind of political triumph.
Among the paramount goals of Reagans political life was his ambition to slow the growth of government, and especially to block or even repeal the social programs launched in the era of Lyndon Johnsons Great Society.
By appearing to make new social spending both practically and politically impossible for the foreseeable future, the deficits served exactly that purpose.
They achieved, in short, Reagans highest political objective: the containment of the welfare state.
Ronald Reagan thus ensured the long-term perpetuation of his dearest political values to a degree that few presidents have managed to achieve.
For better or worse, the consequences of Reaganomics would be large and durable.
Yet another legacy of the 1980s was a sharp reversal of a long-term trend toward a more equitable distribution of income (see the chart on p.
988) and an increasing squeeze on the middle class.
In the early 1990s, median household income (in 1993 dollars) actually declined, from about $33,500 in 1989 to about $31,000 in 1993.
Whether that disturbing trend should be attributed to Reagans policies or to more deeply running economic currents remained controversial.
Ladies and gentlemen, greed is good.
Greed works, greed is right.
Greed for life, money, love, knowledge, has marked the upward surge of mankindand greed, mark my words, will save the malfunctioning corporation called the U.S.A.
Religion pervaded American politics in the 1980s.
Especially conspicuous was a coalition of conservative, evangelical Christians known as the religious right.
In 1979 the Reverend Jerry Falwell, an evangelical minister from Lynchburg, Virginia, founded a political organization called the Moral Majority.
Falwell preached with great success against sexual permissiveness, abortion, feminism, and the spread of gay rights.
In its first two years, the Moral Majority registered between 2 million and 3 million voters.
Using radio, direct-mail marketing, and cable TV, televangelists reached huge audiences in the 1980s, collected millions of dollars, and became aggressive political advocates of conservative causes.
Members of the religious right were sometimes called movement conservatives, a term that recalls the left-wing protest movements of the 1960s.
In many ways the religious right of the 1980s was a reflection of, or answer to, sixties radicalism.
Feminists in the 1960s declared that the personal was political.
The religious right did the same.
What had in the past been personal mattersgender roles, homosexuality, and prayerbecame the organizing ground for a powerful political movement.
Like advocates of multiculturalism and affirmative action, the religious right practiced a form of identity politics.
But rather than defining themselves as Hispanic voters or gay voters, they declared themselves Christian or pro-life voters.
The New Right also mimicked the New Left in some of its tactics.
If the left had consciousness-raising sessions, the right had prayer meetings.
Adherents articulated their positions in a language of rights and entitlements, as in the right-to-life (or anti-abortion) movement.
They even mirrored the tactics of civil disobedience.
Protesters in the 1960s blocked entrances to draft offices; protesters in the 1980s blocked entrances to abortion clinics.
Several leaders of the religious right fell from grace in the latter part of the decade.
One tearfully admitted to repeated trysts with prostitutes.
Another went to prison following revelations of his own financial and sexual misconduct.
But such scandals would not shake the faith of Americas conservative Christians or diminish the new political clout of activist, evangelical religionists.
If the budget was Reagans chief weapon in the war against the welfare state, the courts became his principal instrument in the cultural wars demanded by the religious right.
By the time he left C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 1970 1980 1985 1990 1995 1998 1970 1980 1985 1990 1995 1998 1970 1980 1985 1990 1995 1998 5.4 5.3 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 53.6 53.6 52.2 51.2 49.1 48.6 40.9 15.6 41.1 14.6 43.1 16.1 44.3 17.4 46.5 20.0 47.3 20.7 Highest 5% Share of Received Income by Families, by Quintile, 19701998 (Source:  2000.
) office, Reagan had appointed a near-majority of all sitting judges.
Equally important, he had named three conservative-minded justices to the U.S.
Supreme Court.
They included Sandra Day OConnor, a brilliant, public-spirited Arizona judge.
When she was sworn in on September 25, 1981, she became the first woman to ascend to the high bench in the Courts nearly two-hundred-year history.
Reaganism repudiated two great icons of the liberal political culture: affirmative action and abortion.
The Court showed its newly conservative colors in 1984, when it decreed, in a case involving Memphis fire fighters, that union rules about job seniority could outweigh affirmative-action concerns in guiding promotion policies in the citys fire department.
In two cases in 1989  and  to prove that an employer practiced racial discrimination in hiring and made it easier for white males  to argue that they were the victims of reverse discrimination by employers who followed affirmativeaction practices.
Congress passed legislation in 1991 that partially reversed the effects of those decisions.
The contentious issue of abortion also reached the Court in 1989.
In the case of  the Supreme Court had prohibited states from making laws that interfered with a womans right to an abortion during the early months of pregnancy.
For nearly two decades, that decision had been the bedrock principle on which pro-choice advocates built their case for abortion rights.
It had also provoked bitter criticism from Roman Catholics and various right-to-life groups, who wanted a virtually absolute ban on all abortions.
In  did not entirely overturn  promised   approving a Missouri law that imposed certain restrictions on abortion, the Court signaled that it was inviting the states to legislate in an area in which Court renewed that invitation in  restrict access to abortion as long as they did not place an undue burden on the woman.
Using this standard, the Court held that Pennsylvania could not compel a wife to notify her husband about an abortion but could require a minor child to notify parents, as well as other restrictions.
Right-to-life advocates were at first delighted by the  vanized pro-choice organizations into a new militancy.
Bruising, divisive battles loomed as state legislatures across the land confronted abortion.
This painful cultural conflict over the unborn was also part of the Reagan eras bequest to the future.
Republicans lost control of the Senate in the offyear elections of November 1986.
Hopes rose among Democrats that the Reagan Revolution might be showing signs of political vulnerability at last.
The newly Democratic majority in the Senate flexed its political muscle in 1987 when it rejected Robert Bork, Reagans ultraconservative nominee for a Supreme Court vacancy.
Democrats also relished the prospect of making political hay out of both the Iran-contra scandal and the allegedly unethical behavior that tainted an unusually large number of Reagans official family.
Top administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency resigned in disgrace over a misappropriation of funds.
Reagans secretary of labor stepped down in 1985 to stand trial on charges of fraud and larceny.
(He was eventually acquitted.
) The presidents personal White House aide was convicted of perjury in 1988.
The nations chief law enforcement More than a decade ago, a Supreme Court decision [ off the books of fifty states statutes protecting the rights of unborn children.
Abortion on demand now takes the lives of up to 1 1  2 million unborn children a year.
Human life legislation ending this tragedy will some day pass the Congress, and you and I must never rest until it does.
Unless and until it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living entity, then its right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness must be protected.
officer, Attorney General Edwin Meese, came under investigation by a federal special prosecutor on charges of influence-peddling.
Reagans secretary of housing and urban development was also investigated on charges of fraud and favoritism in the awarding of lucrative federal housing grants.
Disquieting signs of economic trouble also seemed to open political opportunities for Democrats.
The twin towers of deficitsthe federal budget deficit and international trade deficitcontinued to mount ominously.
Falling oil prices blighted the economy of the Southwest, slashing real estate values and undermining hundreds of savings-and-loans (S&L) institutions.
The damage to the S&Ls was so massive that a federal rescue operation was eventually estimated to carry a price tag of well over $500 billion.
Meanwhile, many American banks found themselves holding near-worthless loans they had unwisely foisted upon Third World countries, especially in Latin America.
In 1984 it took federal assistance to save Continental Illinois Bank from a catastrophic failure.
More banks and savings institutions were folding than at any time since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
A wave of mergers, acquisitions, and leveraged buyouts washed over Wall Street, leaving many brokers and traders megarich and many companies saddled with megadebt.
A cold spasm of fear struck the money markets on Black Monday, October 19, 1987, when the leading stockmarket index plunged 508 pointsthe largest oneday decline in history.
This crash, said  magazine, heralded the final collapse of the money culture .
, the death knell of the 1980s.
But as Mark Twain famously commented about his own obituary, this announcement proved premature.
Hoping to cash in on these ethical and economic anxieties, a pack of Democratsdubbed the Seven Dwarfs by derisive Republicanschased after their partys 1988 presidential nomination.
But the Reaganites proved to have no monopoly on shady behavior.
Ironically enough, the handsome and charismatic Democratic front-runner, former Colorado senator Gary Hart, was himself forced to drop out of the race in May 1987 after charges of sexual misconduct.
Black candidate Jesse Jackson, a rousing speechmaker who hoped to forge a rainbow coalition of minorities and the disadvantaged, campaigned energetically, but the Democratic nomination in the end went to the coolly cerebral governor of Massachusetts, Michael Dukakis.
Republicans nominated Reagans vice president, George Bush, who ran largely on the Reagan record of tax cuts, strong defense policies, toughness on crime, opposition to abortion, and a long-running if hardly robust economic expansion.
Dukakis made little headway exploiting the ethical and economic sorespots and came across to television viewers as almost supernaturally devoid of emotion.
On election day the voters gave him just 41,016,000 votes to 47,946,000 for Bush.
The Electoral College count was 111 to 426.
George Herbert Walker Bush was born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
His father had served as a U.S.
senator from Connecticut, and young George had enjoyed a first-rate education at Yale.
After service in World War II, he had amassed a modest fortune of his own in the oil business in Texas.
His deepest commitment, however, was to public service; he left the business world to serve briefly as a congressman and then held various posts in several Republican administrations, including emissary to China, ambassador to the United Nations, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and vice president.
He capped this long political career when he was inauC HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 gurated as president in January 1989, promising to work for a kinder, gentler America.
In the first months of the Bush administration, the communist world commanded the planets fascinated attention.
Everywhere in the communist bloc, it seemed, astoundingly, that the season of democracy had arrived.
In China hundreds of thousands of prodemocracy demonstrators thronged through Beijings Tiananmen Square in the spring of 1989.
They proudly flourished a thirty-foot-high Goddess of Democracy, modeled on the Statue of Liberty, as a symbol of their aspirations.
But in June of that year, Chinas aging and autocratic rulers brutally crushed the prodemocracy movement.
Tanks rolled over the crowds, and machine-gunners killed hundreds of protesters.
In the following weeks, scores of arrested demonstrators were publicly executed after perfunctory trials.
World opinion roundly condemned the bloody suppression of the prodemocracy demonstrators.
President Bush joined in the criticism.
Yet despite angry demands in Congress for punitive restrictions on trade with China, the president insisted on maintaining normal relations with Beijing.
Stunning changes also shook Eastern Europe.
Long oppressed by puppet regimes propped up by Soviet guns, the region was revolutionized in just a few startling months in 1989.
The Solidarity movement in Poland led the way when it toppled Polands communist government in August.
With dizzying speed, communist regimes collapsed in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and even hyperrepressive Romania.
In December 1989, jubilant Germans danced atop the hated Berlin Wall, symbol of the division of Germany and all of Europe into two armed and hostile camps.
The Wall itself soon came down, heralding the imminent end of the forty-five-year-long Cold War.
Chunks of the Walls concrete became instant collectors itemsgray souvenirs of a grim episode in Europes history.
With the approval of the victorious Allied powers of World War II, the two Germanies, divided since 1945, were at last reunited in October 1990.
Most startling of all were the changes that rolled over the heartland of world communism, the Soviet Union itself.
Mikhail Gorbachevs policies of  and   had set in motion a groundswell that surged out of his control.
Oldguard hard-liners, in a last-gasp effort to preserve the tottering communist system, attempted to dislodge Gorbachev with a military coup in August 1991.
With the support of Boris Yeltsin, president of the Russian Republic (one of the several republics that composed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, or USSR), Gorbachev foiled the plotters.
But his days were numbered.
In December 1991 Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president.
He had become a leader without a country as the Soviet Union dissolved into its component parts, some fifteen republics loosely confederated in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), with Russia the most powerful state and Yeltsin the dominant leader.
To varying degrees, all the new governments in the CIS repudiated communism and embraced democratic reforms and free-market economies.
These developments astonished the experts, who had long preached that the steely vise-grip of communist rule never could be peacefully broken.
Yet suddenly and almost miraculously, the totalitarian tonnage of communist oppression had been rendered politically weightless.
Most spectacularly, the demise of the Soviet Union wrote a definitive finish to the Cold War era.
More than four decades of nailbiting tension between two nuclear superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, evaporated when the USSR dismantled itself.
With the Soviet Union swept into the dustbin of history and communism all but extinct, Bush spoke hopefully of a new world order, where democracy would reign and diplomacy would supersede weaponry.
Some observers even saw in these developments the end of history, in the sense that democracy, victorious in its two-century-long struggle against foes on the left and right, had no ideological battles left to fight.
Exultant Americans joked that the USSR had become the USS  Soviet Union was no laughing matter.
Rankling C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 The events of the year just ended, the revolution of 89, have been a chain reaction, changes so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the worlds affairs.
The Cold War is now behind us.
Let us not wrangle over who won it.
It is in the common interest of our two countries and nations not to fight this trend toward cooperation, but rather to promote it.
questions remained.
For example, who would honor arms-control agreements with the United States?
Which of the successor states of the former Soviet Union would take command of the formidable Soviet nuclear arsenal?
(A partial answer was provided in early 1993, when President Bush, in one of his last official acts, signed the START II accord with Russian president Boris Yeltsin, committing both powers to reduce their long-range nuclear arsenals by two-thirds within ten years.
)  Throughout the former Soviet empire, waves of nationalistic fervor and long-suppressed ethnic and racial hatreds rolled across the vast land as communisms roots were wrenched out.
A particularly nasty conflict erupted in the Russian Caucasus in 1991, when the Chechnyan minority tried to declare their independence from Russia, prompting President Yeltsin to send in Russian troops.
Ethnic warfare flared in other disintegrating communist countries as well, notably in misery-drenched Yugoslavia, racked by vicious ethnic cleansing campaigns against various minorities.
The cruel and paradoxical truth stood revealed that the calcified communist regimes of Eastern Europe, whatever their sins, had at least bottled up the ancient ethnic antagonisms that were the regions peculiar curse and that now erupted in all their historical fury.
Refugees from the strife-torn regions flooded into Western Europe.
The sturdy German economy, the foundation of European prosperity, wobbled under the awesome burden of absorbing a technologically backward, physically decrepit communist East Germany.
The stability of the entire European continent seemed at risk.
The Western democracies, which for more than four decades had feared the military  The End of the Cold War Changes the Map of Europe Communist regimes overthrown since 1989     Rise of Solidarity in Poland, 1980.
Czechoslovakia broken into Czech       Republic and Slovakia in 1993.
Soviet Union, dissolved in 1991 and replaced by Commonwealth of Independent States Yugoslavia, dissolved in civil war, 19911992 Fall of Berlin Wall, 1989; Germany unified, 1990.
Gorbachev assumes power, 1985; Moscow coup fails, Boris Yeltsin declared president of Russia, 1990; USSR dissolved, 1991.
Chechnya declares independence, 1991; Russia attacks 1994.
Berlin Moscow U.S.
troops join NATO peacekeeping forces, Dec.
1995.
NATO airwar against Serbia to protect Kosovo, 1999.
RUSSIA KAZAKSTAN KYRGYZSTAN TAJIKISTAN  UZBEKISTAN TURKMENISTAN GEORGIA ARMENIA AZERBAIJAN IRAN IRAQ AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN INDIA CHINA KUWAIT OMAN YEMEN BAHRAIN QATAR U.A.E.
SAUDI ARABIA LIBYA EGYPT TURKEY SYRIA JORDAN ISRAEL LEBANON CYPRUS UKRAINE MOLDOVA BELARUS ESTONIA LATVIA LITHUANIA POLAND ROMANIA See Inset FINLAND SWEDEN NORWAY DENMARK HUNGARY BULGARIA ALBANIA ITALY SPAIN FRANCE IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRIA SWITZ.
BELG.
NETH.
CZECH REP.
SLOVAKIA GERMANY MALTA GREECE SERBIA BOSNIA AND HERZOGOVINA CROATIA SLOVENIA MONTENEGRO MACEDONIA PORTUGAL MOROCCO ALGERIA TUNISIA 0               500 Miles        0         500 Kilometers        Eastern bloc, now ironically saw their well-being threatened by the social and economic  the former communist lands.
The end of the Cold War also proved a mixed blessing for the United States.
For nearly half a century, the containment of Soviet communism had been the paramount goal of U.S.
foreign policy.
Indeed the Cold War era had been the only lengthy period in American history when the United States had consistently pursued an internationalist foreign policy.
With the Soviet threat now canceled, would the United States revert to its traditional isolationism?
What principles would guide American diplomacy now that anticommunism had lost its relevance?
The Soviet-American rivalry, with its demands for high levels of military preparedness, had also deeply shaped and even invigorated the U.S.
economy.
Huge economic sectors such as aerospace were heavily sustained by military contracts.
The economic cost of beating swords into plowshares became painfully apparent in 1991 when the Pentagon announced the closing of thirty-four military bases and canceled a $52 billion order for a navy attack plane.
More closings and cancellations followed.
Communities that had been drenched with Pentagon dollars now nearly dried up, especially in hard-hit southern California, where scores of defense plants shut their doors and unemployment soared.
The problems of weaning the U.S.
economy from its decades of dependence on defense spending tempered the euphoria of Americans as they welcomed the Cold Wars long-awaited finale.
Elsewhere in the world, democracy marched triumphantly forward.
The white regime in South Africa took a giant step toward liberating that troubled land from its racist past when in 1990 it freed African leader Nelson Mandela, who had served twenty-seven years in prison for conspiring to overthrow the government.
Four years later Mandela was elected South Africas president.
Free elections in Nicaragua in February 1990 removed the leftist Sandinistas from power.
Two years later, peace came at last to war-ravaged El Salvador.
Sadly, the end of the Cold War did not mean the end of all wars.
President Bush flexed the United States still-intimidating military muscle in tiny Panama in December 1989, when he sent airborne troops to capture dictator and drug lord Manuel Noriega.
Still more ominous events in the summer of 1990 severely tested Bushs dream of a democratic and peaceful new world order.
On August 2 Saddam Hussein, the brutal and ambitious ruler of Iraq, sent his armies to overrun Kuwait, a tiny, oil-rich desert sheikdom on Iraqs southern frontier.
C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 Oil fueled Saddams aggression.
Financially exhausted by its eight-year war with Iran, which had ended in a stalemate in 1988, Iraq needed Kuwaits oil to pay its huge war bills.
Saddams larger design was ironfisted control over the entire Persian Gulf region.
With his hand thus firmly clutching the worlds economic jugular vein, he dreamed of dictating the terms of oil supplies to the industrial nations, and perhaps of totally extinguishing the Arabs enemy, Israel.
Ironically the United States and its allies had helped supply Saddam with the tools of aggression.
He was widely known to be a thug and assassin who intimidated his underlings by showing them the bodies of his executed adversaries hanging on meat hooks.
But in the 1980s, American enmity for Islamic-fundamentalist Iran was intense, and Saddam was at war with Iran.
Assuming that the enemy of my enemy is my friend, American policymakers helped build Saddams military machine into a formidable force.
On August 2, 1990, Saddams army roared into Kuwait.
The speed and audacity of the invasion was stunning, but the world responded just as swiftly.
The United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the invasion on August 3 and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqs troops.
When an economic embargo failed to squeeze the Iraqis into compliance by November, the Security Council delivered an ultimatum to Saddam to leave Kuwait by January 15, 1991, or U.N.
forces would use all necessary means to expel his troops.
For perhaps the first time in the postWorld War II era, the U.N.
seemed to be fulfilling its founders dreams that it could preserve international order by putting guns where its mouth was.
It also put them where the worlds critical oil supply was.
In a logistical operation of astonishing complexity, the United States spearheaded a massive international military deployment on the sandy Arabian peninsula.
As the January 15 deadline approached, some 539,000 U.S.
soldiers, sailors, and pilotsmany of them women and all of them members of the new, post-Vietnam, all-volunteer American militaryswarmed into the Persian Gulf region.
They were joined by nearly 270,000 troops, pilots, and sailors from twenty-eight other countries in the coalition opposed to Iraq.
When all diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis failed, the U.S.
Congress voted regretfully on January 12 to approve the use of force.
The time bomb of war now ticked off its final few beats.
On January 16, 1991, the United States and its U.N.
allies unleashed a hellish air war against Iraq.
For thirty-seven days, warplanes pummeled targets in occupied Kuwait and in Iraq itself.
The air campaign constituted an awesome display of high-technology, precision-targeting modern warfare.
Yet the Iraqis claimed, probably rightly, that civilians were killed.
Iraq responded to this pounding by launching several dozen Scud short-range ballistic missiles against military and civilian targets in Saudi Arabia and Israel.
These missile attacks claimed several lives but did no significant military damage.
Yet if Iraq made but a feeble military response to the air campaign, the allied commander, the beefy and blunt American general Norman (Stormin Norman) Schwarzkopf, took nothing for granted.
Saddam, who had threatened to wage the mother of all battles, had the capacity to inflict awful damage.
Iraq had stockpiled tons of chemical and biological weapons, including poison gas and the means to spread epidemics of anthrax.
Saddams tactics also included ecological warfare as he released a gigantic oil slick into the Persian Gulf to forestall amphibious assault and ignited hundreds of oil-well fires, whose smoky plumes shrouded the ground from aerial view.
Faced with these horrifying tactics, Schwarzkopfs strategy was starkly simple: soften the Iraqis with relentless bombing, then suffocate them on the ground with a tidal-wave rush of troops and armor.
On February 23 the dreaded and long-awaited land war began.
Dubbed Operation Desert Storm, it lasted only four daysthe hundred-hour war.
With lightning speed the U.N.
forces penetrated deep into Iraq, outflanking the occupying forces in Kuwait and blocking the enemys ability either to retreat or to reinforce.
Allied casualties were amazingly light, whereas much of Iraqs remaining fighting force was quickly destroyed or captured.
On February 27 Saddam accepted a cease-fire, and Kuwait was liberated.
Most Americans cheered the wars rapid and enormously successful conclusion.
Some, remembering the antiwar movement of the 1960s, had protested against going to war.
But the end had come so suddenly and decisively that antiwar sentiment on a large scale never crystallized.
And unlike the forlorn veterans of Vietnam, who had straggled back to their embittered and disillusioned homeland, the troops from Operation Desert Storm returned home to enthusiastic heroes welcomes.
The war had nevertheless failed to dislodge Saddam from power.
When the smoke cleared, he had survived to menace the world another day.
The perpetually troubled Middle East knew scarcely less trouble after Desert Storm had ceased to thunder, and the United States, for better or worse, found itself even more deeply ensnared in the regions web of mortal hatreds and intractable conflicts.
In his inaugural address, George Bush pledged that he would work for a kinder, gentler America.
He redeemed that promise in part when he signed the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, a landmark law prohibiting discrimination against the 43 million U.S.
citizens with physical or mental disabilities.
The president also signed a major water projects bill in 1992 that fundamentally reformed the distribution of subsidized federal water in the West.
The bill put the interests of the environment ahead of agriculture, especially in Californias heavily irrigated Central Valley, and made much more water available to the Wests thirsty cities.
The new president continued to aggravate the explosive social issues that had so divided Americans throughout the 1980s, especially the nettlesome questions of affirmative action and abortion.
C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 Hafar al Batin Al Salman Al Nasiriya Safwan Kuwait City Basra KUWAIT IRAN IRAQ SAUDI ARABIA Allied supply bases Iraqi forces U.S., French, and British forces Saudi forces Pan Arab forces Operation Desert Storm: The Ground War,  February 2327, 1991 In 1990 Bushs Department of Education challenged the legality of college scholarships targeted for racial minorities.
Bush repeatedly threatened to veto civil rights legislation that would make it easier for employees to prove discrimination in hiring and promotion practices.
(He grudgingly accepted a watered-down civil rights bill in 1991.
) Most provocatively, in 1991 Bush nominated  for the Supreme Court the conservative AfricanAmerican jurist Clarence Thomas.
A stern critic of affirmative-action policies, Thomas was slated to  fill a seat vacated by the retirement of Thurgood Marshall, the Courts lone black justice and an outspoken champion of civil rights.
Thomass nomination was loudly opposed by liberal groups, including organized labor, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the National Organization for Women (NOW), which objected to Thomass presumed opposition to abortion rightsthough the nominee studiously refrained from publicly commenting on the landmark abortion case of  v.   thought about it or discussed it.
Reflecting irreconcilable divisions over affirmative action and abortion, the Senate Judiciary Committee concluded its hearings on the nomination with a divided 77 vote and forwarded the matter to the full Senate without a recommendation.
Then, just days before the Senate was scheduled to vote in early October 1991, a press leak revealed that Anita Hill, a law professor at the University of Oklahoma, had accused Thomas of sexual harassment.
The public outcry at this allegation forced the Senate Judiciary Committee to reopen its hearings.
For days a prurient American public sat glued to their television sets as Hill graphically detailed her charges of sexual improprieties and Thomas angrily responded.
Although Hill passed a lie detector test, thirteen other female colleagues of Thomas testified that they had never witnessed any improper behavior.
In the end, by a 5248 vote, the Senate narrowly C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 confirmed Thomas as the second African-American ever to sit on the supreme bench.
Hills charges had failed to block Thomass nomination, but many Americans hailed her as a heroine for her role in focusing the nations attention on issues of sexual harassment.
(Oregons Republican senator Robert Packwood was among the most prominent officials to fall victim to the new sexual etiquette when he was forced to resign from the Senate in 1995 after charges that he had sexually harassed several women.
) Thomas maintained that Hills widely publicized, unproved allegations amounted to a hightech lynching for uppity blacks who in any way deign to think for themselves, to do for themselves.
The furor over Clarence Thomass confirmation suggested that the social issues that had helped produce three Republican presidential victories in the 1980s were losing some of their electoral appeal.
Many women, enraged by the all-male judiciary committees behavior in the Clarence Thomas hearings, grew increasingly critical of the presidents uncompromising stand on abortion.
A gender gap opened between the two political parties, as prochoice women grew increasingly cool toward the strong anti-abortion stand of the Republicans.
Still more damaging to President Bushs political health was the economy, which sputtered and stalled almost from the outset of his administration.
By 1992 the unemployment rate exceeded 7 percent.
It approached 10 percent in the key state of California, ravaged by defense cutbacks.
The federal budget deficit continued to mushroom cancerously, topping $250 billion in each of Bushs years as president.
In a desperate attempt to stop the hemorrhage of red ink, Bush agreed in 1990 to a budget agreement with Congress that included $133 billion in new taxes.
Bushs 1990 tax and budget package added up to a political catastrophe.
In his 1988 presidential campaign, Bush had belligerently declared, Read my lipsno new taxes.
Now he had flagrantly broken that campaign promise.
The intractable budgetary crisis and the stagnant economy congealed in a lump of disgust with all political incumbents.
Disillusion thickened in 1991 when it was revealed that many members of the House of Representatives had written thousands of bad checks from their accounts in a private House bank.
Although no taxpayers money was involved, the image of privileged politicians incompetently managing their private business affairs, with no penalty, even while they were grossly mismanaging the Republics finances, further soured the voters.
A movement to impose limits on the number of terms that elected officials could serve gained strength in many states.
Sniffing this prevailing wind, unprecedented numbers of officeholders announced that they would not stand for reelection.
The slumbering economy, the widening gender gap, and the rising anti-incumbent spirit spelled opportunity for Democrats, frozen out of the White House for all but four years since 1968.
In a bruising round of primary elections, Governor William Jefferson Clinton of Arkansas weathered blistering accusations of womanizing and draft evasion to emerge as his partys standard-bearer.
Breaking with the tradition of a balanced ticket, he selected a fellow fortysomething southern white male Protestant moderate, Senator Albert Gore of Tennessee, as his vice-presidential running mate.
Clinton claimed to be a new Democrat, chastened by the partys long exile in the political wilderness.
Spurred especially by Walter Mondales galling defeat at the hands of Ronald Reagan in 1984, Clinton and other centrist Democrats had formed the Democratic Leadership Council to point the party away from its traditional antibusiness, dovish, champion-of-the-underdog orientation and toward progrowth, strong defense, and anticrime policies.
Clinton campaigned especially vigorously on promises to stimulate the economy, reform the welfare system, and overhaul the nations health-care  apparatus, which had grown into a scandalously ClintonDemocratic BushRepublican PerotIndependent WASH.
11 ORE.
7 CALIF.
54 NEV.
4 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 3 WYO.
3 UTAH 5 COLO.
8 ARIZ.
8 ALASKA 3 S.D.
3 KANSAS 6 OKLA.
8 MICH.
18 N.Y.
33 N.D.
3 MINN.
10 IOWA 7 NEBR.
5 MO.
11 ARK.
6 LA.
9 TEXAS 32 N.M.
5 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
13 FLA.
25 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
13 W. VA.
5 D.C.
3 PA.
23 OHIO 21 IND.
12 ILL.
22 WISC.
11 KY.
8 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
12 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
15 DEL.
3 HAWAII 4 MD.
10 Presidential Election of 1992 (with electoral vote by state) expensive contraption that failed to provide medical coverage to some 37 million Americans.
Trying to wring one more win out of the social issues that had underwritten two Reagan and one Bush presidential victories, the Republican convention in Houston in August 1992 dwelt stridently on family values and, as expected, nominated George Bush and Vice President J. Danforth Quayle for a second term.
A tired and apparently dispirited Bush then took to the campaign trail.
His listless performances and spaghetti sentences set him sharply apart from his youthful rival, the superenergetic, articulate Clinton.
Bush halfheartedly attacked Clintons character, contrasting the Arkansans evasion of military service in the Vietnam War with his own heroic record as a navy flier in World War II.
The president seemed to campaign more for vindication in the history books than for victory in the election.
He tried to take credit for the end of the Cold War and trumpeted his leadership role in the Persian Gulf War.
But fear for the economic problems of the future swayed more voters than pride in the foreign policies of the past.
The purchasing power of the average workers paycheck had actually declined during Bushs presidency.
At Clintons campaign headquarters, a simple sign reminded staffers of his principal campaign theme: Its the economy, stupid.
Reflecting pervasive economic unease and  the virulence of the throw-the-bums-out national mood, nearly 20 percent of voters cast their ballots for independent presidential candidate H. Ross Perot, a bantamweight, jug-eared Texas billionaire who harped incessantly on the problem of the federal deficit and made a boast of the fact that he had never held any public office.
Perots colorful presence probably accounted for the record turnout on election day, when some 100 million voters55 percent of those eligible went to the polls.
The final tallies gave Clinton 43,728,275 popular votes and 370 votes in the Electoral College.
He was the first baby boomer to ascend to the White House, a distinction reflecting the electoral profile of the population, 70 percent of whom had been born after World War II.
Bush polled some 38,167,416 popular and 168 electoral votes.
Perot won no Electoral College votes but  did gather 19,237,247 in the popular countthe strongest showing for an independent or third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran on the Bull Moose ticket in 1912.
Democrats also racked up clear majorities in both houses of Congress, which seated near-record numbers of new members, including thirty-nine African-Americans, nineteen Hispanic-Americans, seven Asian-Americans, one Native American, and forty-eight women.
In Illinois Carol Moseley-Braun became the first AfricanAmerican woman elected to the U.S.
Senate, where she joined five other women in the largest female contingent ever in the upper chamber.
Women also figured prominently in President Clintons cabinet, including the first female attorney general, Janet Reno, and former Wisconsin University president Donna Shalala, who became the secretary of health and human services.
Vowing to shape a government that looked like America, Clinton appointed several ethnic and racial minority members to his cabinet contingent, including former San Antonio mayor Henry Cisneros at Housing and Urban Development and an AfricanAmerican, Ron Brown, as secretary of commerce.
Clinton also seized the opportunity in 1993 to nominate Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court, where she joined Sandra Day OConnor to make a pair of women justices.
Badly overestimating his electoral mandate for liberal reform, the young president made a series of costly blunders upon entering the White House.
In one of his first initiatives on taking office, he stirred a hornets nest of controversy by advocating an end to the ban on gays and lesbians in the armed services.
Faced with ferocious opposition, the president finally had to settle for a dont ask, dont tell policy that quietly accepted gay and lesbian soldiers and sailors without officially acknowledging their presence in the military.
Even more damaging to Clintons political standing, and to his hopes for lasting liberal achievement, was the fiasco of his attempt to reform the nations health-care system.
In a dramatic but personally and politically risky innovation, the president appointed his wife, nationally prominent lawyer and child-advocate Hillary Rodham Clinton, as the director of a task force charged with redesigning the medical-service industry.
After months of highly publicized hearings and scrappy planning sessions, the task force unveiled its stupefyingly complicated plan in October 1993.
Critics C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 immediately blasted the cumbersome, convoluted proposal, which was virtually dead on arrival in Congress, where it was finally buried one year later.
As the reform plans principal architect, the First Lady was doused with a torrent of abuse.
She had entered the White House as a full political partner with her husband, sharing the national spotlight as no previous First Lady had done.
But midway through his first term, she had become a political liability and sidestepped quietly to the shadows.
Clinton had better luck with a deficit-reduction bill in 1993, which combined with a moderately buoyant economy by 1996 to shrink the federal deficit to its lowest level in more than a decade.
He also induced the Congress in 1993 to pass a guncontrol law, the Brady Bill, named for presidential aide James Brady, who had been wounded and disabled by gunfire in the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan in 1981.
In July of 1994, Clinton made further progress against the national plague of firearms when he persuaded Congress to pass a $30 billion anticrime bill, which contained a ban on several types of assault weapons.
With these measures the government struggled to hold the line against an epidemic of violence that rocked American society in the 1990s.
A radical Muslim group bombed New Yorks World Trade Center in 1993, killing six people.
A still larger blast destroyed a federal office building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, in 1995, taking 168 lives, presumably in retribution for a 1993 standoff in Waco, Texas, between federal agents and a fundamentalist sect known as the Branch Davidians.
That showdown ended in the destruction of the sects compound and the deaths of many Branch Davidians, including women and children.
The last two episodes brought to light a lurid and secretive underground of paramilitary private militias, composed of alienated citizens armed to the teeth and ultrasuspicious of all governments.
Even many law-abiding citizens shared to some degree in the antigovernment attitudes that drove the militia members to murderous extremes.
Thanks largely to the disillusioning agony of the Vietnam War and the naked cynicism of Richard Nixon in the Watergate scandal, the confidence in government that had come naturally to the generation that licked the Great Depression and won the Second World War was in short supply by the centurys end.
Reflecting that pervasive disenchantment with politics and politicians, some twenty-three states had imposed restrictions on elected officials with term-limit laws by the mid1990s, though the Supreme Court ruled in 1995 that such laws did not apply to federal officeholders.
Clintons failed initiatives and widespread antigovernment sentiment offered conservative Republicans a golden opportunity in 1994, and they seized it aggressively.
Led by outspoken Georgia representative Newt Gingrich, conservatives offered voters a Contract with America that promised an all-out assault on budget deficits and radical reductions in welfare programs.
Liberal Democrats countered that the conservative pledge should be called a Contract   drowned in the right-wing tornado that roared across the land in the 1994 congressional elections.
Every incumbent Republican gubernatorial, senatorial, and congressional candidate was reelected.
Republicans also picked up eleven new governorships, eight seats in the Senate, and fifty-three seats in the House (where Gingrich became speaker), giving them control of both chambers of the federal Congress for the first time in forty years.
But if President Clinton had overplayed his mandate for liberal reform in 1993, the congressional Republicans now proceeded to overplay their mandate for conservative retrenchment.
The new Republican majority did legislate one long-standing conservative goal when they restricted unfunded mandatesfederal laws that imposed new obligations on state and local governments without providing new revenues.
And in 1996 the new Congress achieved a major conservative victory when it compelled a reluctant Clinton to sign the Welfare Reform Bill, which made deep cuts in welfare grants and required able-bodied welfare recipients to find employment.
The new welfare law also tightly restricted welfare benefits for legal and illegal  immigrants alike, reflecting a rising tide of antiimmigrant sentiment as the numbers of newcomers climbed toward an all-time high.
Old-line liberal Democrats howled with pain at the presidents alleged betrayal of his partys heritage, and some prominent administration members resigned in protest against his decision to sign the welfare bill.
But Clintons acceptance of the welfare reform package was part of his shrewd political strategy of accommodating the electorates conservative mood by moving to his right.
President Clinton was at first stunned by the magnitude of the Republican congressional victory in 1994.
For a time he was reduced to lamely reminding Congress that the president was still relevant to the political and policy-making process.
But many Americans gradually came to feel that the Gingrich Republicans were bending their conservative bow too far, especially when the new speaker advocated provocative ideas like sending the children of welfare families to orphanages.
In a tense confrontation between the Democratic president and the Republican Congress, the federal government actually had to shut down for several days at the end of 1995, until a budget package was agreed upon.
These outlandishly partisan antics bred a backlash that helped President Clinton rebound from his condition as a political dead duck.
As the Republicans slugged it out in a noisy round of presidential primaries in 1996, Clintons reelection campaign raised spectacular sums of moneysome of it, investigations later revealed, from questionable sources.
The eventual Republican standard-bearer was Kansas senator Robert Dole, a decorated World War II veteran who ran a listless campaign.
Clinton, buoyed by a healthy economy and by his artful trimming to the conservative wind, breezed to an easy victory, with 45,628,667 popular votes to Doles 37,869,435.
The Reform partys egomaniacal leader, Ross Perot, ran a sorry third, picking up less than half the votes he had garnered in 1992.
Clinton won 379 electoral votes, Dole only 159.
But Republicans remained in control of Congress.
C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 As Clinton began his second termthe first Democratic president since Franklin Delano Roosevelt to be reelectedhe once again appointed a diversified cabinet, but the heady promises of far-reaching reform with which he had entered the White House four years earlier were no longer heard.
Still facing Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, he proposed only modest legislative goals, even though soaring tax revenues generated by the prosperous economy produced in 1998 a balanced federal budget for the first time in three decades.
Clinton cleverly managed to put Republicans on the defensive by claiming the political middle ground.
He now warmly embraced the landmark Welfare Reform Bill of 1996 that he had initially been slow to endorse.
Juggling the political hot potato of affirmative action, Clinton pledged to mend it, not end it.
When voters in California in 1996 approved Proposition 209, prohibiting affirmative-action preferences in government and higher education, the number of minority students in the states public universities temporarily plummeted.
A federal appeals court decision,  similar effect in Texas.
Clinton criticized these broad assaults on affirmative action but stopped short of trying to reverse them, aware that public support for affirmative action, especially among white Americans, had diminished since the 1970s.
In California and elsewhere, Clinton-style Democrats increasingly sought ways to aid the economically disadvantaged, including minorities, while avoiding the minefield of racial preferences.
Clintons major political advantage continued to be the roaring economy, which by 2000 had sustained the longest period of growth in American history.
While unemployment crept down to 4 percent and businesses scrambled madly for workers, inflationary pressure remained remarkably low.
An economic crisis in late 1997 plunged Southeast Asia and South Korea into financial turmoil, arousing fears of a global economic meltdown.
But despite volatility in the stock market, the United States surged ahead, driven by new Internet businesses and other high-tech and media companies.
The economic Asian flu caused only a few sniffles for the robust American economy.
Prosperity did not make Clinton immune to controversy over trade policy.
During his first  term, Clinton had displayed political courage by WASH.
11 ORE.
7 CALIF.
54 NEV.
4 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 3 WYO.
3 UTAH 5 COLO.
8 ARIZ.
8 S.D.
3 KANSAS 6 OKLA.
8 MICH.
18 N.Y.
33 N.D.
3 MINN.
10 IOWA 7 NEBR.
5 MO.
11 ARK.
6 LA.
9 TEXAS 32 N.M.
5 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
13 FLA.
25 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
13 W. VA.
5 PA.
23 OHIO 21 IND.
12 ILL.
22 WISC.
11 KY.
8 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
12 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
15 DEL.
3 MD.
10 D.C.
3 ALASKA 3 HAWAII 4 ClintonDemocratic DoleRepublican PerotIndependent Presidential Election of 1996 (with electoral vote by state) The solid South, once a safe Democratic stronghold, had by centurys end largely become Republican territory.
supporting the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), creating in 1993 a free-trade zone encompassing Mexico, Canada, and the United States.
In doing so, he reversed his own stand in the 1992 election campaign and bucked the opposition of protectionists in his own party, especially labor leaders fearful of losing jobs to low-wage Mexican workers.
Clinton took another step in 1994 toward a global free-trade system when he vigorously promoted the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and a cherished goal of free-trade advocates since the end of the Second World War.
Simmering discontent over trade policy boiled over in 1999 when Clinton hosted the meeting of the WTO in Seattle.
The citys streets filled with protesters railing against what they viewed as the human and environmental costs of economic globalization.
Clinton, eager to keep Democratic party activists and the trade unions in line in the upcoming election year, expressed measured sympathy with the protest, to the dismay of trade negotiators from the poor countries of the Southern Hemisphere, who resented Yankee meddling with their plans for economic development.
Trade talks fizzled in Seattle, with Clinton taking a hefty share of the blame.
Money spurred controversy of another sort in the late 1990s.
Campaign finance reform, long smoldering as a potential issue, suddenly flared up after the 1996 presidential campaign.
Congressional investigators revealed that the Clinton campaign had received funds from many improper sources, including contributors who paid to stay overnight in the White House and foreigners who were legally prohibited from giving to American campaigns.
But Republicans and Democrats alike had reason to avoid reform.
Both parties had grown dependent on vast sums to finance television ads for their candidates.
Clinton did little more than pay lip service to the cause of campaign finance reform.
But within the ranks of both parties, a few mavericks proposed to eliminate the corrupting influence of big donors.
Senator John McCain from Arizona made campaign finance reform a centerpiece of his surprisingly strong, though ulimately unsuccessful, bid for the Republican presidential nomination in the 2000 campaign.
Two domestic issues inspired Clinton to act boldly in his second term: the fights  tobacco and  tobacco companies and the attorneys general of several states worked their way toward a huge legal settlement.
In return for restricting advertising targeted at young people and for giving the states $358 billion to offset the public-health costs of smoking, the tobacco firms would win immunity from further litigation, including at the federal level.
When the deal came before Congress, Clinton weighed in heavily behind it, while big tobacco spent $40 million to snuff it out.
The deal collapsed, but the tobacco wars continued.
Months later eight states worked out a more limited settlement, and in 1999 the Clinton administration shifted its strategy to the C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 courts, where it hoped lawsuits would eventually force the tobacco industry to reimburse the federal government the $20 million a year Clinton officials argued Uncle Sam had spent since the 1950s on smokers health.
Clintons focus on gun control had a tragic impetus.
On an April morning in 1999, two students at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, killed twelve fellow students and a teacher in the deadliest of a series of school shootings that shook the nation in the mid to late 1990s (see p.
1006).
Debate flared over the origins of this epidemic of school violence.
Some observers targeted the violence of movies, TV shows, and video games, others the failings of parents.
But the culprit that attracted the most sustained political attention was guns their abundance and accessibility, especially in suburban and rural communities, where most of the school shootings had occurred.
Clinton engaged in a pugnacious debate with the progun National Rifle Association over the need to toughen gun laws.
The Million Mom March in Washington in May 2000 demonstrated the growing public support for new antigun measures.
The end of the Cold War robbed the United States of the basic principles on which it had conducted foreign policy for nearly half a century, and Clinton groped for a diplomatic formula to replace anticommunism in the conduct of Americas foreign affairs.
The Cold Wars finale also shook a number of skeletons loose from several government closets.
Sensational revelations that Central Intelligence Agency double agents had sold secrets to the Soviets during the Cold War years, causing the execution of American agents abroad, demonstrated that the ghost of the Cold War still cast its frosty shadow over official Washington.
Absorbed by domestic issues, President Clinton at first seemed uncertain and even amateurish in his conduct of foreign policy.
He followed his predecessors lead in dispatching American troops as part of a peacekeeping mission to Somalia and reinforced the U.S.
contingent after Somali rebels killed more than a dozen Americans in late 1993.
But in March 1994, the president quietly withdrew the American units, without having accomplished any clearly defined goal.
Burned in Somalia, Washington stood on the sidelines in 1995 when catastrophic ethnic violence in the central African country of Rwanda resulted in the deaths of half a million people.
A similar lack of clarity afflicted policy toward Haiti, where democratically elected president JeanBertrand Aristide had been deposed by a military coup in 1991.
Clinton at last committed twenty thousand American troops to return Aristide to the Haitian presidency in 1994, after thousands of desperate Haitian refugees had sought asylum in the United States.
It took time, too, for Clinton to settle on an approach to China.
Candidate Clinton had denounced George Bush in 1992 for not imposing economic sanctions on China as punishment for Beijings wretched record of human rights abuses.
But President Clinton learned what Bush had long known: Chinas economic importance to the United States did not permit Washington the luxury of taking the high road on human rights.
Clinton soon soft-pedaled his criticism of the Beijing regime and instead began seeking improved trade relations with that rapidly industrializing country and potential market bonanza.
By 2000 Clinton had become the countrys leading crusader for a controversial China trade bill, passed by Congress in May 2000, which made the Asian giant a full-fledged trading partner of the United States.
Clintons approach to the tormented Balkans in southeastern Europe showed a similar initial hesitation, followed eventually by his assumption of a leadership role.
In the former Yugoslavia, as vicious ethnic conflict raged through Bosnia, the Washington government dithered until finally deciding to commit American troops to a NATO peacekeeping contingent in late 1995.
Deadlines for removing the troops were postponed and then finally abandoned altogether as it became clear that they were the only force capable of preventing new hostilities.
NATOs expansion to include the new member states of Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic in 1997, and its continuing presence in Bosnia, failed to pacify the Balkans completely.
When Serbian president Slobodan Milosevic in 1999 unleashed a new round of ethnic cleansing in the region, this time against ethnic Albanians in the province of Kosovo, U.S.-led NATO forces launched an air war against Serbia.
The bombing campaign initially failed to C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 stop ethnic terror, as refugees flooded into neighboring countries, but it eventually forced Milosevic to accept a NATO peacekeeping force in Kosovo.
With ethnic reconciliation still a distant dream in the Balkans, Washington accepted the reality that American forces had an enduring role as peacekeepers in the region.
The Middle East remained a major focus of American diplomacy right up to the end of Clintons tenure.
In 1993 Clinton presided over a historic meeting at the White House between Israeli premier Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader Yasir Arafat.
They agreed in principle on self-rule for the Palestinians within Israel.
But hopes flickered two years later when Rabin fell to an assassins bullet.
Clinton and his second-term secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, spent the rest of the 1990s struggling to broker the permanent settlement that continued to elude Israelis and Palestinians.
In Iraq Saddam Hussein persisted in his game of hide-and-seek with U.N.
inspectors monitoring the Iraqi weapons program.
When the chief U.N.
inspector reported in 1998 that Iraq was out of compliance with U.N.
rules, America and Britain launched air strikes against Iraqi weapons factories and warehouses.
That same year the United States also conducted missile attacks against alleged terrorist sites in Afghanistan and Sudan in retaliation for terrorist bombings that had killed more than two hundred people at the U.S.
embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
In his final year as president, Clinton stepped up his efforts to leave a legacy as an international peacemaker.
Along with his work in the Middle East, he sought to bring peace to Northern Ireland and the Korean peninsula, and he traveled to India and Pakistan in hopes of reducing the rivalry between the two nuclear powers of southern Asia.
Although the guiding principles of foreign policy in the post Cold War era remained elusive, Clinton had become a stalwart opponent of the minority factions in both parties that yearned for a new isolationism.
President Clinton had ample cause for concern about his lasting reputation, since scandal had dogged him from the beginning of his presidency.
Allegations of flagrant wrongdoing, reaching back to his prepresidential days in Arkansas, included a failed real estate investment known as the Whitewater Land Corporation.
The Clintons role in that deal prompted the appointment of a federal special prosecutor to investigate.
Suspicions were especially aroused by the apparent suicide in 1993 of White House counsel and close Clinton associate Vincent W. Foster, Jr., who had handled the Clintons legal and financial affairs.
The presidents loose ethics and womanizing even found fictional expressions in a runaway 1996 best-seller,  though the actual Whitewater investigation never proved any Clinton wrongdoing.
But all the previous scandals were overshadowed when allegations broke in January 1998 that Clinton had engaged in a sexual affair with a young White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, and then lied about it when he testified under oath in a civil lawsuit.
The lawsuit had been brought by an Arkansas woman, Paula Jones, who charged that thengovernor Clinton had sexually harassed her when she was a state employee.
The Supreme Court had unanimously agreed to permit the case to go forward in May 1997, ruling that being sued in a civil case would not significantly distract the president from his duties.
The accusation that Clinton had lied under oath in the Jones case presented a stunning windfall to the special prosecutor, Kenneth Starr, originally appointed to investigate the Whitewater deal.
Like Captain Ahab pursuing the whale Moby Dick, Starr had relentlessly traced Clintons steps for years, spending $40 million but never succeeding in finding evidence against the president himself.
Clinton, now suddenly caught in a legal and political trap, delivered vehement public denials that he had engaged in sexual relations with that woman.
After maintaining his innocence for eight months, Clinton was finally forced to acknowledge an inappropriate relationship.
In September 1998 Starr presented to the House of Representatives a stinging report, including graphic sexual details, charging Clinton with eleven possible grounds for impeachment, all related to the Lewinsky matter.
Led by its fiercely anti-Clinton Republican majority, the House quickly cranked up the rusty machinery of impeachment.
After a nasty partisan debate, the House Republicans in December 1998 eventually passed two articles of impeachment against the president: perjury before a grand jury and obstruction of justice.
Crying foul, the Democratic minority charged that, however deplorable Clintons personal misconduct, sexual transgressions did not rise to the level of high crimes and misdemeanors prescribed in the Constitution (see Art.
II, Sec.
IV in the Appendix).
The House Republican managers (prosecutors) of impeachment for  the Senate trial, led by Illinois congressman and House Judiciary Committee chairman Henry Hyde, claimed that perjury and obstruction were grave public issues and that nothing less than the rule of law was at stake.
As cries of honor the Constitution and sexual McCarthyism filled the air, the nation debated whether the presidents peccadilloes amounted to high crimes or low follies.
Most Americans apparently leaned toward the latter.
In the 1998 midterm elections, voters reduced the House Republicans majority, causing fiery House speaker Newt Gingrich to resign his post.
Incredibly, Clintons job approval rating remained high and even rose throughout the long impeachment ordeal.
Although Americans held a low opinion of Clintons slipshod personal morals, most liked the presidents political and economic policies and wanted him to stay in office.
Kenneth Starrs stock in public opinion fell accordingly.
In January and February 1999, for the first time in 130 years, the nation witnessed an impeachment proceeding in the U.S.
Senate.
Dusting off ancient precedents from Andrew Johnsons trial, the one  hundred solemn senators heard arguments and  evidence in the case, with Chief Justice William Rehnquist presiding.
With the facts widely known and  the two parties political positions firmly locked in, the trials outcome was a foregone conclusion.
On the key obstruction of justice charge, five northeastern Republicans joined all forty-five Democratic senators in voting not guilty.
The fifty Republican votes  for conviction fell far short of the constitutionally required two-thirds majority.
The vote on the perjury charge was forty-five guilty, fifty-five not guilty.
With the impeachment trial over, a weary nation yearned for Washington to move on to other business.
Vowing to serve until the last hour of the last day of my term, Clinton spent what remained of his presidency seeking to secure a legacy for himself  as an effective leader and moderate reformer.
He designated major swaths of undeveloped land as protected wilderness and won public support  for health-care improvements in the form of a patients bill of rights.
He took advantage of big federal budget surpluses to win congressional approval for hiring 100,000 more teachers and 50,000 more police officers.
Budget surpluses brought out the enduring differences between Republicans and Democrats.
The former urged big tax cuts, the latter a mixture of smaller cuts and new C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 ways to shore up Medicare and Social Securitya conflict in aims that set the stage for the 2000 presidential campaign.
Beyond the obvious stain of impeachment, Clintons legacy was bound to be a mixed one for his country and his party.
He came to office in 1992 determined to make economic growth his first priority, and in this domain he surely succeeded.
Benefiting from a global expansion he had done little to foster, he nonetheless made sound appointments to top economic posts and kept a steady eye on the federal budget.
The country achieved nearly full employment by decades end, poverty rates inched down, and median income reached new highs.
From 1998 to 2000, the federal budgets resulted in surpluses rather than deficits.
Yet by governing successfully as a New Democrat and avowed centrist, Clinton did more to consolidate than reverse the Reagan-Bush revolution against the New Deal liberalism that had for half a century provided the compass for the Democratic party and the nation.
As a brilliant communicator, Clinton kept alive a vision of social justice and racial harmony.
But as an executive, he discouraged people from expecting government to remedy all the nations ills.
By setting such a low standard for his personal conduct, he replenished the sad reservoir of public cynicism about politics that Vietnam and Watergate had created a generation before.
In the last days of his presidency, Clinton negotiated a deal with the Special Prosecutor to win immunity from possible legal action over the Lewinsky scandal by agreeing to a fine and a five-year suspension of his law license.
Controversy trailed Clinton out the White House door when the departing president issued several executive pardons that gave at least the appearance of rewarding political backers and donors.
Like Dwight D. Eisenhower in the 1950s, Clinton regarded the election of his vice president as a further means of ensuring his own legacy.
Clintons loyal vice president, Al Gore, easily won the Democratic partys presidential nomination in 2000.
A quarter-century in national government, as congressman, senator, and vice president, had made Gore a seasoned and savvy policy expert, but many Americans found his somewhat formal personal bearing to be off-putting, especially when contrasted with the winsome charm of his boss.
Gore also faced the tricky challenge of somehow associating himself with Clinton-era prosperity while detaching himself from Clinton-era scandal.
Trying to distance himself from Clintons peccadilloes, he chose as his running mate Connecticut senator Joseph Lieberman, an outspoken critic of Clinton during the Lewinsky affair and the first Jew nominated to a national ticket by a major party.
Meanwhile, consumer advocate Ralph Naders Green party threatened to siphon off the ballots of environmentalists who might otherwise have voted  for Gore, a long-time champion of vigorous proenvironmental policies.
300 200 100 0 100  200  300 Billions of dollars SURPLUSES $290 $236 DEFICITS 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Deficits into Surpluses In 1998 the U.S.
Budget deficit became a surplus for the first time in decades.
(Sources: Office Management and Budget and Bureau of Labor Statistics.
) The Republican nominee, George W. Bush, had catapulted to party prominence on the strength of his being the eldest son of former president George Bush and his popularity as a two-term governor of Texas.
Though untested on the national stage, he inspired the loyalty of able lieutenants and organized a formidable campaign with a promise to restore dignity to the White Housea thinly veiled attack on Clintons personal failings.
Bush chose Dick Cheney, former secretary of defense in the elder Bushs administration and a key planner in the Persion Gulf War of 1991, as his vice-presidential running mate, lending the ticket a much-needed aura of experience.
Styling himself a compassionate conservative, George W.
(also W, or sometimes dubbya) promised to bridge the bitter division between moderates and die-hard conservatives within the Republican party.
Rosy estimates that the federal budget would produce a surplus of some $2 trillion over the coming decade set the stage for the presidential contest.
Bush called for returning two-thirds of the surplus to the people in the form of a $1.3 trillion acrossthe-board tax cut.
True to the Republican creed of smaller government, Bush championed privatesector initiatives, such as school vouchers, a reliance on faith-based institutions to serve the poor, and reforms to the Social Security system that would permit individual workers to invest part of their payroll taxes in private retirement accounts.
Gore countered that Bushs tax plan would benefit the rich much more than the poor.
Gore advocated a more modest tax cut targeted at the middle and lower classes and proposed using most of the surplus to reduce or even eliminate the national debt, shore up Social Security, and expand Medicare.
In this postCold War era, foreign policy did not figure prominently in either candidates campaign.
Pollsters and candidates alike predicted a close election, but they could not foresee that the result would be an epochal cliffhanger.
Not since the Hayes-Tilden election of 1876 had the usual electoral mechanisms ground their gears so badly before yielding a definite conclusion.
In the pivotal state of Florida (where the Republican candidates brother Jeb Bush served as governor), the vote was so close that state law compelled a recount.
When that second tally confirmed Bushs paper-thin margin of victory, Democrats called for further hand recounts in several counties where confusing ballots and faulty machines seemed to have denied Gore a legitimate majority.
Crying foul, Republicans turned to the courts to block any more recounting.
A bizarre judicial tussle ensued as battalions of Democratic lawyers challenged the legality of Floridas voting procedures and legions of Republican lawyers fought to stymie them.
When the Florida Supreme Court ordered a hand count of nearly sixty thousand ballots that the machines had failed to read, Republicans struck back on two fronts.
The Republican-dominated C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 Florida legislature moved to name a set of pro-Bush electors, regardless of the vote tabulating and retabulating then under way.
The Bush campaign also took its case to the U.S.
Supreme Court.
There, with the eyes of an increasingly restive nation riveted on the proceedings, the nine justices broke into a bareknuckle judicial brawl.
Five bitterly divisive weeks after election day, the presidential campaign of 2000 finally ended when the high courts five most conservative members ruled in Bushs favor.
They reasoned that since neither Floridas legislature nor its courts had established a uniform standard for evaluating disputed ballots, the hand counts amounted to an unconstitutional breach of the Fourteenth Amendments equal protection clause.
In a rare departure from high court decorum, the liberal minority excoriated the majority.
Justice John Stevens wrote scathingly that the Courts decision jeopardized the nations confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.
The Supreme Court ruling gave Bush the victory but also cast a cloud of illegitimacy over his presidency.
Bushs final official margin of victory in Florida was only 537 votes of 6 million cast, and his national tally in the popular vote, 50,456,169 votes, fell short of Gores 50,996,116.
Bush also faced a Congress more evenly divided than any in history.
For the first time, the Senate was split fifty-fifty between Democrats and Republicans, and the GOPs grip on the House dwindled to just a ten-vote majority.
The election featured other novelties besides its minuscule margins of victory.
W became only the second son of a president, after John Quincy Adams, to win the White House.
Hillary Rodham Clinton became the first First Lady to run for office, winning a U.S.
Senate seat from New York.
The fiasco of the 2000 election severely tested American democracy, but in the end it earned a passing grade.
The nations two-century-old electoral machinery might have shown its age, but it managed to wheeze and clank its way to a peaceful resolution of one of the most ferociously contested presidential races ever.
It could even be said that Americas muchmaligned political system managed to display a  certain awkward dignity.
Despite the fuss about unreadable ballots and all the partisan maneuvering, no credible charges of serious chicanery or outright corruption wafted up out of the elections cauldron of controversy.
No really threatening riotous rabble filled the nations streets.
Both camps sought victory by calling out the lawyers, not the generals.
No insoluble constitutional crisis emerged.
And however unsettling the U.S.
Supreme Courts intervention might have been, surely it was better to have the buck stop with the judges, not with a junta.
The foresight  of the Founders in crafting a system of elections  and courts stood reaffirmed for the new century, although the imbroglio unquestionably demonstrated the need for modernized and nationally uniform balloting procedures.
Some critics even called for the abolition of the Electoral College.
Presidential Election of 2000 (with electoral vote by state) Although Democratic vice president Albert Gore won the popular election for president by half a million votes, George W. Bushs contested five-hundredvote advantage in Florida gave him a slight lead in the Electoral College.
The 2.7 million popular votes won by Green party candidate and consumer activist Ralph Nader almost surely deprived Gore of victory, casting Nader in the role of spoiler.
Bushs failure to win the popular vote inspired critics to protest at his inauguration with placards reading Hail to the Thief.
WASH.
11 ORE.
7 CALIF.
54 NEV.
4 IDAHO 4 MONTANA 3 WYO.
3 UTAH 5 COLO.
8 ARIZ.
8 S.D.
3 KANSAS 6 OKLA.
8 MICH.
18 N.Y.
33 N.D.
3 MINN.
10 IOWA 7 NEBR.
5 MO.
11 ARK.
6 LA.
9 TEXAS 32 N.M.
5 MISS.
7 ALA.
9 GA.
13 FLA.
25 TENN.
11 N.C.
14 S.C.
8 VA.
13 W. VA.
5 PA.
23 OHIO 21 IND.
12 ILL.
22 WISC.
11 KY.
8 ME.
4 N.H.
4 VT.
3 MASS.
12 R.I.
4 CONN.
8 N.J.
15 DEL.
3 MD.
10 D.C.
3 ALASKA 3 HAWAII 4 BushRepublican GoreDemocratic NaderGreen C HAPTER 41 The Resurgence of Conservatism, 19802000 Reagan defeats Carter for presidency Iran releases American hostages Reaganomics spending and tax cuts passed Solidarity movement in Poland OConnor appointed to Supreme Court (first woman justice) United States aids antileftist forces in Central  America Recession hits U.S.
economy Reagan announces SDI plan (Star Wars) U.S.
marines killed in Lebanon U.S.
invasion of Grenada Reagan defeats Mondale for presidency Gorbachev comes to power in Soviet Union First Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting, in Geneva Reagan administration backs Aquino in Philippines Iran-contra scandal revealed Second Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting, in Reykjavik, Iceland Senate rejects Supreme Court nomination of Robert Bork U.S.
naval escorts begin in Persian Gulf 508-point stock-market plunge Third Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting, in Washington, D.C.
; INF treaty signed Fourth Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting, in Moscow Bush defeats Dukakis for the presidency Chinese government suppresses prodemocracy demonstrators Eastern Europe throws off communist regimes Berlin Wall torn down Iraq invades Kuwait East and West Germany reunite Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Persian Gulf War  Thomas appointed to Supreme Court Gorbachev resigns as Soviet president Soviet Union dissolves; republics form Commonwealth of Independent States Twenty-seventh Amendment (prohibiting congressional pay raises from taking effect until an election seats a new session of Congress) ratified Clinton defeats Bush and Perot for presidency NAFTA signed Republicans win majorities in both houses of Congress Welfare Reform Bill becomes law Clinton defeats Dole for presidency Clinton-Lewinsky scandal U.S.
and Britain launch military strikes against Iraq House of Representatives impeaches Clinton Senate acquits Clinton on impeachment charges Kosovo crisis; NATO warfare with Serbia Protest in Seattle against World Trade Organization Million Man March against guns in Washington, D.C.
U.S.
normalizes trade relations with China George W. Bush wins presidency in Electoral College, although Albert Gore takes popular vote onald Reagans election surprised many historians.
Reflecting a liberal political outlook that is common among academic scholars, they were long accustomed to understanding American history as an inexorable, almost evolutionary, unfolding of liberal principles, including the quests for economic equality, social justice, and active government.
That point of view animated the enormously popular writings of the so-called progressive historians, such as Charles and Mary Beard, earlier in the century (See Chapter 23, Varying Viewpoints: The Populists: Radicals or Reactionaries?).
For the Beards, conservatives were the rich, privileged elites bent on preserving their wealth and power and determined to keep government impotent, but doomed in the end to give way to the forces of liberal democracy.
Even the New Left revisionists of the 1960s, while critical of the celebratory tone of their progressive forebears, were convinced that the deepest currents of American history flowed leftward.
But whether they were liberal or revisionist, most scholars writing in the first three postWorld War II decades dismissed conservatism as an obsolete political creed.
The revisionists were much more interested in decrying liberalisms deficiencies than in analyzing conservatisms strengths.
Liberals and revisionists alike abandoned the Beards image of powerful conservative elites and offered instead a contemptuous portrait of conservatives as fringe wackosparanoid McCarthyites or racist demagogues who, in the words of the liberal critic Lionel Trilling, trafficked only in irritable mental gestures which seem to resemble ideas.
Such an outlook is conspicuous in books like Daniel Bell, ed.,  But what flowed out of the turbulent decade of the 1960s was not a strengthened liberalism, but a revived conservatism.
Ronald Reagans huge political success compelled a thorough reexamination of the tradition of American conservatism and the sources of its modern resurgence.
Historians including Leo Ribuffo and Alan Brinkley have argued that characters once dismissed as irrational crackpots or colorful irrelevanciesincluding religious fundamentalists and depression-era figures like Huey Long and Father Charles Coughlinarticulated values deeply rooted and widely shared in American culture.
Those conservative spokespersons, whatever their peculiarities, offered a vision of free individuals, minimal government, and autonomous local communities that harked back to many of the themes of civic republicanism in the era of young nationhood.
But modern conservatism, however deep its roots, is also a product of the recent historical past.
As scholars like Thomas Sugrue and Thomas Edsall have shown, the economic stagnation that set in after 1970 made many Americans insecure about their futures and receptive to new political doctrines.
At the same time, as the commentator Kevin Phillips has stressed, social issues, with little or no apparent economic content, became increasingly prominent, as movements for sexual liberation, abortion on demand, and womens rights sharply challenged traditional beliefs.
Perhaps most important, the success of the civil rights movement thrust the perpetually agonizing question of race relations to the very center of American political life.
Finally, the failure of government policies in Vietnam, runaway inflation in the 1970s, and the disillusioning Watergate episode cast doubt on the legitimacy, efficacy, and even the morality of big government.
Many modern conservatives, including the pundit George Will, stress the deep historical roots of American conservatism.
In their view, as Will once put it, it took sixteen years to count the ballots from the 1964 (Goldwater versus Johnson) election, and Goldwater won after all.
But that argument is surely overstated.
Goldwater ran against the legacy of the New Deal and was overwhelmingly defeated.
Reagan ran against the consequences of the Great Society and won decisively.
Many conservatives, in short, apparently acknowledge the legitimacy of the New Deal and the stake that many middle-class Americans feel they have in its programs of Social Security, home mortgage subsidies, farm price supports, and similar policies.
But they reject the philosophy of the Great Society, with its more focused attack on urban poverty and its vigorous support of affirmative action.
Modern conservatism springs less from a repudiation of government per se and more from a disapproval of the particular priorities and strategies of the Great Society.
The different historical fates of the New Deal and the Great Society suggest the key to the rise of modern conservatism.
For further reading, see page A28 of the Appendix.
For web resources, go to  
